The EuroQol Group aims to validate the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox. An opportunity has come up at the Rotterdam Eye Hospital (the Netherlands) to include the translated vision bolt-ons in ongoing and new externally funded data collections in glaucoma and vitreoretinal surgery. These studies can provide evidence for validity of the vision bolt-ons. It is therefore important that the vision bolt-on items are translated soon. Thus, we are proposing the translation of the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox vision bolt-ons to Dutch and seeking funding support for it from EuroQol.This study aims to conduct a full researcher-led translation of the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox vision bolt-ons (Paper Self-complete versions) into Dutch to make it available for future validation or valuation work. We will translate all items (4 in total) from the ‘Best available’ and ‘Exploratory’ toolbox.In accordance, with the EuroQol VMC translation guidelines, this involves two forward and two backward translations by four independent translators, which are fluent in English and Dutch, followed by a total of 8 cognitive debriefing interviews to ensure the clarity, naturalness, and adequacy of the translations, while also confirming that respondents interpret the wording as intended.First, the translation process involves two independent forward translations into Dutch from the UK English source versions for the current vision bolt-ons, which will be reconciled afterwards followed by the production of the first consensus version. The selected forward translators are fluent in English and native Dutch speakers. Secondly, based on the first consensus version two independent back translations of that version will be produced and reconciled in a subsequent back translation meeting. The appointed backward translators are fluent in Dutch and English with no to little prior experience on EuroQol questionnaires. As a result of the back-translation meeting, a draft second consensus version will be generated. Upon approval of the translation stages by the VMC, the finalised second consensus version will be carried forward to conduct a cognitive debriefing on the translations. Overall, 8 respondents will be recruited. These 8 respondents will be recruited from the Rotterdam Eye Hospital: 4 males and 4 females with a variety of eye conditions and of various ages, of which 2 with lower education levels (only primary school education). The cognitive debriefing interviews will be conducted by an experienced qualitative researcher.The tentative timelines for this project will be October to December 2025.Generally, this study will follow the design proposed by the VMC for translation work.Note: After completion of this study, the Dutch version of the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox vision bolt-ons will be checked in Belgium, to see whether a separate Flemish version of the vision bolt-ons is needed.
