Relative to other countries, Bermuda has achieved above-average performance on several health indicators. Despite this, the health system in Bermuda faces some challenges. These include high levels of expenditure on healthcare, rising prevalence of non-communicable disease and inequality in access to healthcare. The Ministry of Health of Bermuda has outlined a strategy for dealing with these challenges over the medium term. A decision has been taken to create an EQ-5D value set for Bermuda which can support policy and clinical decision-making by allowing at the policy level: economic evaluation of health interventions and programmes, measuring burden of disease, and tracking health inequality. At the clinical level EQ-5D can be used to monitor and track patients’ health outcomes through a treatment or an illness and to compare the performance of healthcare interventions. EQ-5D is used for these purposes in many countries and is recommended by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) in the United Kingdom as the preferred health outcomes measure for economic evaluation. A protocol that included a Discrete Choice Experiment (DCE) and composite Time-Trade Off (cTTO) component was developed based on recent developments in EQ-5D valuation methods. 366 adults in Bermuda completed the valuation tasks in on-line interviews with an experienced EQ-5D valuation interview team in Trinidad. A bootstrapping approach was used to estimate a DCE-cTTO hybrid model based on which an EQ-5D-3L value set was created. An EQ-5D-5L crosswalk value set was developed based on the EQ-5D-3L value set. There were challenges in recruiting respondents for the survey resulting in a sample that was not fully representative of the Bermuda population in age and sex. This is due in part to the small population requiring surveys from a sample approaching 1% of the adult population. Analytical methods were employed to overcome the representativeness of the sample such that the resulting model would reflect the preferences of the adult population of Bermuda. The EQ-5D-3L value set and the crosswalk EQ-5D-5L value set created for Bermuda are presented in the Appendices.
