Background: The EuroQol Toddler and Infant Populations (EQ-TIPS) is a generic measure of HRQoL for children aged 0-4 years. The instrument is currently being developed as part of a large multicountry project involving mainly Western Europe, South Africa, Australia, Asia, and North and South America. The EQ-TIPS has never been translated or used in any Eastern European country or language. The instrument is proxy-assessed, but EuroQol has not yet provided guidance on who can serve as a proxy or how assessments may differ between caregivers. Such differences may depend on caregiver characteristics such as age, gender, relationship to the child, caregiving experience, health background, and time spent caring.Objectives: This study aims to translate and cognitively debrief the EQ-TIPS to Hungarian and to assess its content validity (relevance, comprehensibility, and comprehensiveness) among caregiver dyads of the same children (aged 0-4 years) diagnosed with moderate or severe atopic dermatitis. We further aim to qualitatively explore the factors potentially affecting proxy reporting among caregiver dyads.Methods: The study team will conduct a researcher-led translation and cognitive debriefing of the EQ-TIPS-5L following EuroQol VMC guidelines. A total of 15 dyads (30 respondents) will be recruited from two dermatology centers in two large Hungarian cities, Budapest and Pécs. One-on-one, semi-structured interviews will be conducted with two caregivers of the same child. A standardised topic guide will be developed for the interviews, which combine the elements of concurrent think-aloud and retrospective verbal probing. We will focus on the following aspects of content validity: relevance of the items to capture the construct of interest (HRQoL problems in children with moderate or severe AD aged 0-4 years), missing concepts, understandability of the instructions and response options, the appropriateness of item wording, response options and recall period. We will compare qualitative responses from the two caregivers of the same child to identify factors influencing proxy reporting.
