Background:More attention is devoted nowadays to simple discrete choice(DC)tasksbetween descriptions of health states to obtain ordinal data that can subsequently usedin statisticalmodels to derivehealth-state values. Such values are often used for the computationof quality-adjusted life years(QALYs). A requirement of the conventional QALYs is that there should be a fixed localization of dead atzero. One strategy in DC experiments is to include the state‘dead’ as a choice optionthat may be preferredover states considered as worse than dead. However, this may become cumbersome if subjects have difficulty with the appraisal of ‘dead’ and consider all health states at least better than dead.Objective: To introduce a novel method that calibrates health states and the localization of ‘dead’together in a less biased way.Methods: Data from the Measurement and Valuation of Health study were analyzed. Three different probit modelswere estimated. Thefirst model(classical Thurstonianmodel)used response data fromassessmentsofholistic(no consideration of the levels of the attributes)health states andthe state ‘dead’. Subsequently, the values for the best and worst state of this modelwere used as anchors for another model without‘dead’. This second model used dummies for thelevels of thehealth-state attributesand was calibrated on the range of the first model. The result of thesecombinedmodelswerecompared to a ‘traditional’model. Here,attribute-level dummy variables and a ‘dead’-dummy variablewere analyzed.Results: All three modelsproduced regression coefficientsthat werelogically orderedand estimated health-state values wererathersimilar.Sensitivity analysis of the novel calibration method showed that the proportion of people who considered certainstates as worsethandead does not affecttherelative health-state values.Conclusion: The novel calibration method proved to be feasible in practice. Several theoretical advantages and limitations of this method were identified and discussed.
