Constantly improving the EQ-5D descriptive system is one of the key mandates of EuroQol. To achieve this, specific dimensional bolt-ons were developed, offering a more fine-tuned approach to assessing the health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in patients diagnosed with various diseases. This study will focus on a bolt-on dimension that was specifically developed to improve the responsiveness of EQ-5D in assessing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma. Despite the various studies addressing the importance and feasibility of bolt-ons through psychometric comparisons, and some through valuation studies, research on the acceptability and content validity of these bolt-ons is equally crucial. Such studies ensure that the instrument adequately captures the relevant aspects of the concept under investigation. Evidence from these studies enhances the global applicability of the instrument, especially when tested in non-Western environments, where cultural and contextual differences may affect the relevance of HRQoL assessments. Thus, the present study proposal aims to evaluate the acceptability and content validity of the EQ-5D 5-Level (EQ-5D-5L) in asthma patients in Kazakhstan, where limited evidence on the use of EQ-5D-5L is available. Few studies have measured HRQoL using the EQ5D instrument in Kazakhstan, specifically in patients with hepatitis (Polukchi & Slavko, 2024), depression in older population (Papageorgiou et al., 2022), hereditary coagulopathies (Vorobyev et al., 2011), and HIV (Zhakipbayeva et al., 2019). Notably, there are no studies involving patients with COPD, despite its status as one of the leading causes of death in the country (Gulis et al., 2021). Additionally, there are no investigations into the content validity of the instrument in Central Asia. Therefore, the proposed content validity check will help ensure that the instrument accurately reflects the lived experiences and health concerns of patients in a non-Western setting, ultimately contributing to its broader global use and relevance. This qualitative study will add to the existing body of EuroQol research by evaluating the applicability of the EQ-5D-5L bolt-ons for asthma patients. Content validity will be assessed through semi-structured, one-to-one interviews with 40 adult asthma patients in Kazakhstan. All 40 participants will first undergo interviews using the concept elicitation method to uncover patient-perceived impacts of asthma, offering deeper insights into how they experience the disease. Following this, the cognitive-debriefing method will be employed to evaluate the acceptability and practical application of the EQ-5D-5L bolt-on, ensuring that the instrument accurately reflects the patients’ HRQoL. The practical usefulness of this study is in its potential to refine the EQ-5D-5L bolt-ons, ensuring they are more sensitive to the specific experiences of asthma patients, particularly in non-Western contexts like Kazakhstan. By assessing the acceptability and content validity of the bolt-ons, the study will provide critical insights into whether this tool accurately captures the HRQoL in asthma patients.
