Background: As a self-reported index instrument, the EQ-5D-5L (5L) has a considerable risk of missing data, potentially leading to biased estimates when not handled adequately. To address this issue, multiple imputation strategies (MI) and longitudinal linear mixed models (LLM) have shown to be promising. MI can be divided into two broad categories, Joint Modelling (JM) and Fully Conditional Specification (FCS). However, it remains unclear which MI approach best suits longitudinal 5L data and whether to impute missing 5L data at the response or index level. In this study, we explored the performance of the aforementioned methodological strategies to handle 5L data in clinical trials using simulated and empirical data. Methods: 2,000 complete data sets were simulated based on empirical trial data, including 5L responses at baseline and two time points. Missing data was introduced at rates of 10%, 25%, and 50% under Missing At Random (MAR), Missing Completely At Random (MCAR), or Missing Not at Random (MNAR). Different missingness patterns were applied at index and response levels. Six strategies were evaluated: complete-case analysis with ordinary least squares (CCA-OLS), LLM alone, FCS with LLM at index-level (FCS-LLM index), FCS with LLM at response-level (FCS-LLM response), JM with LLM at index-level (JM-LLM index), JM with LLM at response-level (JM-LLM response). Performance was assessed using empirical bias (EB), root-mean-square error (RMSE), and coverage rate (CR). Furthermore, the six strategies were applied to empirical trial data to descriptively assess the generalizability of our results. Results: CCA-OLS resulted in highly biased estimates. LLM alone had similar and oftentimes slightly smaller EBs and RMSEs than JM-LLM at 10%, 25%, and 50% missing data, irrespective of missingness pattern. FCS-LLM is outperformed by LLM alone and JM-LLM in all scenarios. Among MI strategies, JM-LLM had smaller EBs and RMSEs than FCS-LLM. In all scenarios, all method were slightly overfitted, with FCS-LLM having CRs closest to the nominal level. At 50% missing data, all strategies resulted in high EBs and RMSEs. MI performed worse when imputing at the response-level rather than on index-level MI, and LLM could not be performed at all on response-level. The MCAR results aligned with the MAR findings, whereas the MNAR results exhibited larger EBs and lacked a clear pattern indicating a superior or inferior strategy. In the empirical trial data, estimates from CCA-OLS deviated considerably from those of the other strategies, whereas estimates derived using LLM and MI at index-level were highly similar. The latter, however, was not the case for MI at the response-level. Conclusions: CCA-OLS yields biased estimates, whereas LLM seems to perform slightly better than MI strategies for handling missing 5L data in trial-based evaluations, provided that baseline data are complete. If this assumption does not hold, among MI strategies, JM-LLM is preferred, and index-level imputation is advised.
