Objectives In our previous investigation of two non-iterative Time Trade-Off (TTO) methods - open TTO and non-stopping TTO - we found indications that EQ-5D health states could be evaluated using approaches with reduced burden on both interviewers and interviewees compared to the cTTO method. Inspired by recent developments in online TTO assessments, we devised a self-administered TTO method (referred to as sTTO), combining elements of the two non-iterative TTOs. Our aim was to evaluate the feasibility of sTTO by comparing it with the conventional TTO (cTTO) in a sample of the general population. Methods We developed a computer-based tool similar to EQ-VT for the valuation of EQ-5D-5L health states using sTTO. Thirty EQ-5D-5L health states, chosen from an orthogonal array, were evaluated by individuals from the general population in Guizhou Province, China. Participants were provided with a pre-recorded video explanation of the valuation task before completing 11 sTTO tasks independently, without assistance from interviewers. For comparison with cTTO, we utilized data collected in a previous study following the EQ-VT protocol. We compared the burden of administration, logical consistency, value distribution, acceptability and modeling performance of the two methods. Results A total of 324 participants contributed data, with 143 using the cTTO method and 181 using the sTTO method. On average, the time taken to complete the survey and a single valuation task was 26 minutes and 1.5 minutes shorter, respectively, with sTTO compared to cTTO. We observed logical inconsistencies in 78% of participants using sTTO, with 51% showing severe inconsistencies, compared to 1.4% and 14% respectively for cTTO. The mean health-state value for sTTO (0.293) was slightly higher than that for cTTO (0.256). However, cTTO values displayed a smoother and more continuous distribution with fewer spikes and gaps, and a wider range of unique values. Additionally, cTTO outperformed sTTO in all criteria of modeling performance. Participant feedback indicated moderate challenges with sTTO compared to cTTO. Conclusion While the sTTO method proved to be significantly more time-efficient for valuing EQ-5D-5L health states, suggesting acceptable administration burden, the data quality was inferior to that of cTTO data collected with trained interviewers. Participant feedback also suggested that sTTO presented moderate challenges, slightly less acceptable than cTTO. These findings indicate that the current design of sTTO may not be feasible for valuing EQ-5D health states when self-administered. Future research could explore its feasibility for use in group interviews and investigate alternative designs for self-administered TTO valuation.
