Background: Vision loss due to rare eye diseases (RED) such as inherited retinal dystrophies (IRD) has tremendous psychosocial, emotional and functional consequences, with attendant effects on quality of life. Generic Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) measures like the EQ-5D-5L may underrepresent these impacts. To inform cost-effectiveness analyses of new interventions, Health technology assessments (HTA) rely on accurate HRQoL data. In the absence of such data for novel gene therapies, HTA bodies rely on HRQoL estimates from unrelated ocular diseases, which poorly reflect the experiences of patients with IRD due to differences in pathology and age profile. To address these gaps, EuroQol has developed a Vision bolt-on within the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox, currently undergoing psychometric validation.Objectives: We aim to assess the content validity of four versions of the EQ-5D-5L Bolt-on Toolbox Vision bolt-on in adults affected with IRDs through in-depth patient interviews and cognitive debriefing. Methods: A qualitative study will be conducted using semi-structured cognitive debriefing interviews with approximately 30 adults diagnosed with IRD, recruited via the SUL registry (Irish national node of the ERN-EYE–coordinated European REDgistry, which collects harmonised pseudonymised data on rare eye diseases using a shared governance framework). Respondents will complete and discuss 4 different versions of the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox Vision bolt-on, including variations in wording (e.g. 'vision' vs. 'sight') and the in- or exclusion of visual aids (e.g. 'with glasses/contact lenses') to confirm that bolt-on items are meaningful, understandable, and relevant to IRD patients’ real-world experiences. Data will be analysed thematically following EuroQol guidance to identify issues related to clarity, relevance, and conceptual coverage.Expected outcomes: This study is expected to deliver robust qualitative evidence on the appropriateness of Vision bolt-on wording in IRD populations to inform EuroQol’s selection and refinement of items for the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox.
