An aim of the EOWG is to address the educational needs of the EuroQol community including members, and end-users. The EuroQol Group puts in the public domain instruments for measuring HRQL, and it is our mandate to provide sufficient guidance and education on what these instruments are and to explain the science and methods in measuring and valuing health.  We propose to develop and deliver an E-learning program that serves as an introductory course on EuroQol Group’s science and methods in measuring and valuing health. This E-learning educational program will initially target two main groups (but is open to others):  i. end-users with an interest in the science and methods of these instruments, who may be involved in various applications including cost-effectiveness research, clinical effectiveness research, real-world evidence generation, population health assessment and as a PROM for routine outcome measurement within health systems. These include professionals and trainees in various fields including health economics, pharmaco-economics, public health, health policy and other related-fields. ii. researchers who are active in selected areas of our field and who aim to develop a comprehensive understanding of instruments for measuring and valuing health  The E-learning program will be structured in such a way that it can be implemented again with less effort (eg by pairing pre-recorded lectures with live sessions) and can be expanded (e.g. with advanced modules or by developing other modules for a specific audience)  Over the subsequent 18 months, our aims are:  To develop and implement five online modules that may be completed over a period of 15 weeks to 8 months (to be decided based on input from targeted groups). To evaluate the performance of each module in terms of instruction, use of technology, cost, and market potential.   This e-learning program will provide participants with the basic knowledge and training required to become active contributors toward EuroQol scientific aims. NOTE: Zhihao Yang, EOWG Chair, has made the Exec aware that this program was under development. The EOWG is supportive of this activity and the working group has contributed to the proposal's content. A formal letter of support can be provide upon request.
