The travel proposal would allow us to further in-depth study the application of the EQ-5D-Y as a PROM in children, and would allow me to extent my expertise using an international environment. My living costs are to a large extent covered by a grant from the Sino-Dutch Bilateral Exchange Scholarship. However, traveling abroad and working temporary elsewhere cannot be accommodate by this sources. Therefore, I would like to apply for a travel grant, so I can continue my research in the rich international environment the EuroQol network offers.  Exploring an international environment has been very beneficial for me so fare. As a PhD student supervised by Professor Jan Busschbach at Erasmus University Rotterdam, I specialize in validating EuroQol instruments for paediatric patients and their parental carers. With a background as a paediatrician at a Shanghai hospital, I aim to bridge clinical practice with research. Inspired by Professor Nancy Devlin's work at the University of Melbourne, I seek to explore the use of PROMs in clinical practice and health systems. I propose a visit to Melbourne, from June 2024 to March 2025, focuses on two objectives: conducting research on the clinical application of generic HRQoL instruments, notably the EQ-5D-Y in paediatric patients with rare diseases. This visit will then allow me to foster a research partnerships between Erasmus University Rotterdam, my hospital in Shanghai, and the University of Melbourne. Through this visit, I aim to gain insights into the potential role of PROM in clinical practice, enhance opportunities for the use of EQ-5D-Y in China and facilitate collaborations on future research projects relevant to my PhD studies and professional trajectory. During this 9-months study visit, I am keen to learn paediatric PROM co-design principles, embedding within an Electronic Medical Record (EMR), development of supporting clinical materials, and implementation skills which are all being progressed in the Australian context. I aim to immerse myself in the QUOKKA research projects, engage with the research team, attend seminars and meetings, and participate in discussions with PROMs end-users. Furthermore, I will have the opportunity to collaborate with several PhD students from the University of Melbourne's Health Economics team, who are also members of the EuroQol PhD network like myself. This will offer abundant collaboration opportunities, foster mutual learning among us and help establish a long-term partnership that extend beyond our graduation. Most importantly, I intend to contribute to a specific research project which outlined is describe below: Title: Exploring the Clinical Application of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs) in Paediatrics: a Focus on the EQ-5D-Y-5L and PedsQL  • Background: Despite the enthusiastic efforts and promising results of researchers, integrating PROMs into clinical practice poses challenges. For instance, a standard PROM scoring system does not exist and medical providers find it difficult to make clinical decisions using normative-based scores. Second, structural barriers within healthcare systems, including limited consultation time, lack of implementation recommendations, and prioritization of laboratory outcomes, may impede the seamless integration of PROMs. Third, successful integration relies on genuine co-design to meet the needs of clinicians and patients, as well as addressing challenges in embedding PROMs in the EMR, including feedback presentation formats to patients and clinicians. Moreover, using validated PROMs that have undergone psychometric processes to ensure that the PROM measures what is intended. Therefore, PROMs that are ideal for use in clinical practices are those that both assess important outcomes for patients and providers and are valid, reliable, and specific to the context of use for the disease under study. • Research Aim: The aim of this research is to study and explore how generic health-related quality of life instruments, such as the EQ-5D-Y-5L and Paediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL), can be used in routine clinical care as PROMs in paediatric patients with rare disease (ITP) or cancer (Neuroblastoma or Wilms tumour). Specifically, the study will focus on codesigning preferences for PROM integration with perspectives from patients, parental carers and clinicians, and piloting the use of PROMs in paediatric inpatient and outpatient settings. The following questions will be studied: a) Are generic measure of quality of life, like EQ-5D-Y-5L helpful in clinical consultation with individual patients? b) What is the added values of generic PROMs over disease specific measure? c) What are favourable characteristics of generic measure of quality of life needed to ensure usefulness? d) To what extent does the EQ-5D-Y-5L meet such characteristics? e) Are generic HRQoL measure helpful when assessing oriented related research and application, such as a measure of the productivity of the clinical unit and the effectivity of the interventions given? • Proposed methods: a) Study Design: we propose to conducted a longitudinal study including two time points, before and after treatment, and will employ a mixed-methods approach, incorporating both qualitative and quantitative methods. b) The local ethics approval will be applied once the funding has been approved. c) Participants: we aim to recruit paediatric patients and their parental carers in China from various disease severity levels, as determined by two clinical diagnosis: paediatric central nervous system solid tumour (Neuroblastoma or Wilms tumour), and immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP).Our goal is to enrol a total of 240 dyads consisting of children/adolescents and their parental carers at the baseline, i.e., 120 dyads for each disease group, with a follow-up rate of 70%. d) Data Collection: Patients will be asked to complete the EQ-5D-Y-5L and Paediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL) during their clinic visits or hospital stays. Parents will be asked to complete the EQ-HWB-S and EQ-5D-5L. e) Data Analysis: In addition to validating the psychometric properties of EQ-5D-Y-5L and PedsQL, our primary focus will be on investigating the acceptability and usefulness of these measures from the perspectives of both families and clinicians. We will prioritize assessing feasibility, response distribution, and construct validity, alongside exploring stakeholders' perspectives on PROM integration and utility in clinical care through qualitative data analysis of interviews and focus groups. Additionally, we will compare the performance of EQ-5D-Y instruments with PedsQL to understand their relative efficacy in paediatric clinical settings.
