Objectives EQ-5D is increasingly being used outside the context of health technology assessment (HTA), e.g. as patient-reported outcome measure in patient registries, in population health studies and in personalized medicine. For non-HTA purposes, there is no rationale for using value sets to summarize profile data. There is a clear need for a global, single summary score based on self-reported data. In this project, we first developed EQ-5D-5L patient-reported summary scores (EQ-PRSM, or PRSM) using two methodological approaches, based on dimension-specific rating scales (RS, additive and weighted by EQ VAS); and on Rasch and Item Response Theory (IRT) models. Second, we psychometrically compared six EQ-5D-5L PSRM scores. Methods The following PSRM models were developed and compared: RS additive (RSA), RS weighted (RSW and RSW2), unidimensional Rasch (Rasch), unidimensional 2 parameter IRT (2PL) and multidimensional IRT (MIRT) including items from other instruments. The comparison also included the experience-based VAS value set for Sweden (EXP) and the level sum score (LSS). PRSM scores were compared cross-sectionally and longitudinally, in terms of distributional characteristics (visually and with Shannon’s indices), convergent validity with generic and condition-specific measures, discriminatory power comparing eight patient groups to an non-diseased group and responsiveness. For cross-sectional comparisons the multi-instrument comparison (MIC) dataset was used (N=8022) and for longitudinal comparisons samples of rehabilitation patients (N=230) and stroke patients (N=112) were used. Results RSW, RSW2 and MIRT resulted in the smoothest distributions while EXP demonstrated a large upper gap. Shannon’s indices were highest for MIRT, followed by 2PL, and lowest for RSA. Convergent validity with generic and condition-specific measures was highest for RSW and EXP, and lowest for 2PL. Discriminatory power was highest for MIRT, followed by RSW2 and RSW, and lowest for 2PL and EXP. Relative efficiency of discriminatory power showed that MIRT, RSW2, Rasch and LSS were able to discriminate better than RSA, while RSW/RSW2 were superior to EXP, and MIRT was in turn superior to RSW/RSW2. Responsiveness results were mixed, with RSW2, RSW and RSA showing the best SRM results and 2PL and EXP the lowest, while for SES LSS and 2PL were highest and EXP the lowest. Conclusion In this study PRSM scores, based on two methodological approaches, were developen, and a psychometric comparison was performed of six PRSM scores based on these approaches. Overall, the weighed rating scale scores (RSW and RSW2) arguably showed the best results, followed by MIRT. The 2PL score performed poorly for mental health patients due to the low weight attributed to the anxiety/depression domain. The experience-based VAS value set for Sweden performed poorly in terms of discriminatory power and responsiveness. While PRSM scores resulting from both (RS and IRT) approaches empirically performed superior to LSS, these approaches may also be preferred for theoretical and conceptual grounds. The MIRT score however is based on external items which poses a challenge (e.g. the final PRSM score is dependent on which additional items are used), and arbitrary choices (e.g. using equal weights across dimensions). This study proves the usefulness of using patient-reported summary scores for EQ-5D-5L beyond the level sum score, for use in population health and health systems applications.
