Background: Type 1 Type-1 diabetes mellitus and heart diseases are the most common medical problems among children in Ethiopia. Children's health-related quality of life (HRQoL) outcome measure are currently receiving attention. EQ-5D-Y-5L health survey in children has been used in different countries. Objective: To assess the psychometric properties of the Amharic EQ-5D-Y-5L Experimental version and, thereby, to test whether the measure is feasible, reliable, and valid to use among healthy and children with prevalent disease conditions. Methods. Data were collected using a pen-and-paper survey that presents the self-complete Amharic EQ-5D-Y-5L Experimental version and EQ-VAS. A cluster sampling strategy was used to select 200 school children study participants from ten sub-cities in Addis Ababa city, Ethiopia. A supervisor selected one class from the elementary school of each sub-city using simple random sampling techniques. Within each class (n=40-60), 20 students between the age of 8 and 12 were randomly selected and invited to complete a self-complete Amharic EQ-5D-Y-5L Experimental version and EQ-VAS. For children with the prevalent disease conditions (Type-1 diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, rheumatic heart disease) participants were identified from Tikur Anbessa Specialized Hospital (TASH) of diabetic and cardiac clinics. A sample of 55 study participants (23 congestive heart failure, 17 rheumatic heart disease, and 15 Type-1 diabetes mellitus) who had unchanged health state based on the general health item received the questionnaire again 10 days after the first task for the test-retest procedures to investigate reliability of the instrument. Ceiling was compared in between paired versions with the X2 test and the absolute reduction in proportion scoring was calculated. The test-retest method was used to determine stability. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare the mean (SD) LSS scores for each instrument between groups with known health conditions to assess known group validity. Results. The mean (SD) age of the participants in this study was 10.35 (1.42) years of which 51.00% were female. A sample of 450 participants (200 school children, 65 Type-1 diabetes mellitus, 70 Rheumatic heart disease, and 115 congestive heart failure) were recruited and 437 participants (200 school children, 62 Type-1 diabetes mellitus, 66 Rheumatic heart disease, and 109 congestive heart failure) were included in the sample for analysis. All of the EQ-5D-Y-5L dimensions and the EQ-VAS had strong intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC), which fall within the range of good agreement for all respondents (ICC ranges from 0.52-0.77, p 0.001). The differences in self-complete Amharic EQ-5D-Y-5L Experimental version and EQ-VAS scores between disease groups demonstrate the self-complete Amharic EQ-5D-Y-5L Experimental version's significant known group validity. Conclusion: The Amharic EQ-5D-Y-5L Paper EXPERIMENTAL Self-Complete appears to be a suitable measure for assessing HRQoL in various child population groups in Ethiopia, according to this study.
