Objective: Visual analogue scales (VAS) yield interval-level data that may complement an instrument's descriptive system. While existing EQ-5D instruments include the EQ VAS, the EQ-HWB-9 currently lacks an accompanying VAS. Prior mixed-methods evidence in a small US sample (n=34) suggested that candidate VAS constructs were perceived differently qualitatively yet did not differ meaningfully in quantitative ratings. To further inform the inclusion of an appropriate VAS with the EQ-HWB-9, this study examined whether construct specification produced measurable differences in VAS ratings and associations with the EQ-HWB-9 descriptive system across three countries.Methods: Responses were analyzed from an online survey of 916 adults from the US, UK, and Germany who completed the EQ-HWB-9 and three VAS versions specifying constructs of Health, Health and Wellbeing (HWB), and Quality of Life (QoL) with 7-day recall periods, in random order. Means, effect sizes, correlations, and agreement between ratings were compared across VAS versions. Construct-specific convergent validity was evaluated by correlations with EQ-HWB-9 items and external anchors. Multiple linear regression models estimated the variance in VAS ratings explained by EQ-HWB-9 items, with partial η² quantifying each item's unique contribution. Subgroup analyses by country and among caregivers and social care users were also explored.Results: Mean VAS ratings did not differ significantly across constructs (p = 0.195; all Cohen's d < 0.20), and inter-construct agreement was good (ICC = 0.77). EQ-HWB-9 items explained comparable variance across constructs (R² = 0.39–0.44), but with construct-specific differential sensitivity: Pain and self-rated health correlated most strongly with VAS-Health, while Sad/Depressed, Lonely, life satisfaction, and relationship satisfaction correlated most strongly with VAS-QoL. VAS-HWB was most explained by a balanced mix of physical and psychosocial items and was preferred by respondents, with 45.9% selecting HWB as best capturing EQ-HWB-9 content and 59.9% ranking HWB as the preferred construct.Conclusions: The three VAS versions yielded similar aggregate ratings and comparable overall explanatory power but differed in terms of which EQ-HWB-9 dimensions predicted their scores. VAS-HWB demonstrated the most balanced alignment with the EQ-HWB-9 in terms of coverage of items predicting ratings and was favored by respondents. These findings support VAS-HWB as a candidate for further investigation for inclusion with the EQ-HWB-9.
