Several preference-based wellbeing measures, including the EQ-HWB-S, have been developed to measure outcomes beyond health-related quality of life (HRQoL) for economic evaluation. To operationalise this work, it is important to examine the level of the overlap between these different approaches. This can be achieved by comparing the content of these measures against an established conceptual framework and consulting with the community. Additionally, empirical evidence on the degree of overlap and differences in psychometric properties will help guide the use of these measures. Another key consideration for the application of the EQ-HWB-S is the consistency of responses and subsequent estimates of values from the standalone EQ-HWB-S compared to those derived from the full-length EQ-HWB. Understanding the consistency in responses, and therefore values, between the versions, will help to establish the flexibility of the EQ-HWB-S. This is especially relevant in situations where the full-length EQ-HWB may not provide additional information at the expense of respondent burden. Overall, this study aims to explore the validity and application of the EQ-HWB by providing a detailed understanding of its relationship with other preference-based measures of wellbeing in adults (ICECAP-A, ASCOT and WiX), and investigate the potential of the EQ-HWB-S as a standalone measure. Specifically, the aims of this study are to: A. Compare the content of the EQ-HWB and other wellbeing measures and examine the degree of conceptual and empirical overlap between them. B. Examine the consistency and validity of the EQ-HWB-S as a standalone measure compared to when derived from the EQ-HWB using primary data collected in Australia. C. Compare the psychometric properties of the EQ-HWB and other wellbeing measures using data collected from the general Australian population. The item content of the EQ-HWB, ICECAP-A, ASCOT and WiX will be linked to categories of a conceptual framework (Olsen and Misajon, 2020) which expands on existing frameworks to integrate HRQoL within the broader context of subjective wellbeing. The number of codings per category will be descriptively analysed to identify distinct and overlapping conceptual areas across instruments.  We will also collect data from a sample of 1000 people in Australia, administering the EQ-HWB, EQ-HWB-S (as a standalone) and the other wellbeing measures. Psychometric properties will be analysed and compared, and the degree of overlap between measures will be assessed. Additionally, the consistency of responses between the EQ-HWB-S scores obtained from the standalone version and the full-length EQ-HWB will be evaluated by analysing the degree of agreement and stability of responses. This study meets the funding priorities listed by the EQ-HWB Group by contributing to understanding of the placement and value of the EQ-HWB-S alongside other social care and wellbeing measures used in economic evaluation, and alongside the full-length EQ-HWB. The study also supports the Strategic Plan’s objective to advance the development of the EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S to ‘approved’ status.
