Objectives: The EQ-5D-5L is commonly used in population health studies, clinical trials and economic evaluations as a measure of health. A key assumption for the validity EQ-5D-5L data is measurement invariance, meaning that its items and response options are interpreted in the same way across respondents. If measurement invariance is violated, the EQ-5D-5L would exhibit differential item functioning (DIF), whereby individuals from different groups with the same underlying health respond to it differently. This study investigates whether the EQ-5D-5L is affected by DIF using ordinal logistic regression (OLR). Methods: Data from the Multi-Instrument Comparison (MIC) study was used to investigate DIF, across the following groups: older adults aged 65+ versus younger adults aged 18-64; women versus men; and individuals with different levels of education attainment (high school versus diploma/technical training or university education). OLR was used to investigate whether individuals across groups had different expected EQ-5D-5L scores, despite having the same underlying health. Effect size measures were used to assess whether identified DIF indicated meaningful differences in scores. Analyses were completed on purified and unpurified EQ-5D-5L sum scores and on split-half samples to test the stability of results. Results: No meaningful DIF relating to gender or education was observed for any item. The anxiety/depression item exhibited meaningful age-related DIF, with older adults being less likely to report problems with anxiety and depression. Mobility exhibited age-related DIF to a lesser extent but did not meet the threshold for meaningful DIF. Findings were stable across purified and unpurified analyses. Conclusion: The EQ-5D-5L did not exhibit DIF for gender or education, suggesting response behaviour is generally stable across these groups. Meaningful age-related DIF was found for anxiety/depression and, to a lesser extent for mobility. These findings are consistent with those of a previous study. It is important to further understand causes of DIF in older populations as this may bias estimates of burden of illness and treatment effectiveness. Further research is also required to understand how to control for such DIF.
