Introduction:Allocation of very limited healthcare resources in Pakistan led to issues of equity, accessibility and fairness. Despite the high burden of disease and resource constraints in developing countries, there is limited use of patient-centered evidences to inform shared medical decision-making and/or resource allocation. To date, population preferences for health states described by the EQ-5D (3L or 5L) are not available for Pakistan, health outcome measurement in Pakistan has almost exclusivelyrelyingon clinical end-points. Aimof the study:The primary objectivesof the present study were to examine the acceptability and feasibility of using the preference elicitation methods that are part of the EQ-5D-3L valuation studies protocol (TTO and DCE)with the Pakistani population and to explore the impact of contextual factors (e.g., culture, religion) society on the preferences of the Pakistani population and on the usefulness of TTO and DCE. Methods: A total sample of 105respondents, 75literate and 30 illiterate adults aged between 18 and 65 years were selected using conveniencesampling technique to participatein this pilot study. Urdu version of EQ-5D is already available and was used for the present study. The EQ-PVT components including instructions and health state descriptions were translated to Urdu. This study involved the use of quantitative and qualitative research methods. The quantitative component involved piloting the EuroQol valuation studies protocol using the EuroQol Portable Valuation Technology (EQ-PVT) including Time-trade-off (TTO) and discrete choice experiment (DCE) without duration techniques. The EQ-5D-3L, the demographic questionnaire were verbally administered by the interviewers, and the TTO and DCE questions were illustrated using PPT graphical presentations to the illiterate respondents. The qualitative component involved conducting a semi-structured interview with a sub-set of respondents; interviews were audio-recorded andwere conducted until data saturation on key themes is reached. Recorded interviews were transcribed by professional transcriptionist. Content and thematic analysis was used to analyze this data. Quantitative and qualitative data was analyzed side-by-side to answer questions around feasibility and appropriateness of the used methods. Choice models were conducted on DCE and TTO data to evaluate the impact of health domains on the choice outcomes. Results:Compared with literate respondents, illiterate respondents were more likely to be older, unemployed, had lower education/income,and reside in rural areas; in addition, they are more likely to to speak Punjabiand have family members living in the same householdwith lessincome earning members; more over, they are more likely to report lower self-reported health. In all dimension, there is a much better distribution of responses across the levels in the 5L version compared to the 3L version, especially in the mobility, pain/discomfort, and anxiety/depression dimensions. Overall, quality control indicators were similar between literate and illiterate respondents. Although not significantly different, number of non-traders (those who do not trade any years for any health state irrespective of severity) was slightly higher in illiterate respondents. DCE estimates suggested that impact of health impairment on usual activities imposed highest influences on how respondents made their choices. And, presence of moderate problems in mobility was most likely led to respondents avoid choosing to be in that particular health state. The range of TTO values for the two groups was somewhat similar. Majority ofthe respondents reported that religion had noimpact on their responses(literate or illiterate). In addition, literate respondents indicatedthatno response of cultural beliefs on their responses while most of the illiterate respondents highlighted the impact of cultural norms on their responses, especially self-care. Conclusion:The results of this pilot study indicate that using the preference elicitation methods (TTO and DCE) is feasible, practical and acceptable with the Pakistani population. The usefulness and practicality of graphical illustrations of health dimensions/states and preference elicitation exercises with illiterate respondents has also been proven successful; however, incorporating these graphics in the electronic EQ-VT/PVT platform would be more useful.
