AbstractObjectives:To date there have been no value sets tosupport the use of the EQ-5D-Y in cost-utility analysis. DCE can be used to obtain values on a latent scale, but thesevaluesrequire anchoringat 0 = dead to meet the conventions of QALY estimation.The primary aim of this study is to compare four preference elicitationmethods for anchoring EQ-5D-Y values. Methods:Four methods were tested: VAS, DCE (with a duration attribute), lag-time TTO and therecently developed‘location-of-dead’(LOD)element of the PUF approach. Adult respondents were asked to value both EQ-5D-3Lhealth states from an adultperspective(considering their own health)and EQ-5D-Y health states from a child perspective (considering the health of a 10yearold child). All respondents completed valuation tasks using all four methods,under both perspectives. For a subset of respondents the instrument was controlled for, i.e. EQ-5D-Y healthstates were valued under both perspectives. Results:Three-hundred and forty-nineinterviews were conducted. Overall, respondents gave lower values under the adult perspective compared to child perspective, withsomevariation across methods. The meanTTO value for health state33333was about equal to dead in the child perspective and worse than deadin the adult perspective. The meanVAS rescaled value for33333 was also higher in the child perspective thaninthe adult perspective. The DCE with duration results followed the samepattern, i.e. positive child perspective valuesandnegative adult perspective values, though themodels were notconsistent. The LODmedian rescaled value for 33333 was negative under both perspectives, and higher in the child perspective. When asked directly about their prioritisation preferences, 65%of respondentsindicatedthat treating adults andtreatingchildrenshould have same priority. Discussion:There was broad agreement across all methods. Values for 33333 tendedto be negativeforthe adult perspectiveand closer to 0for the child perspective. Potentialcriteria for selectinga preferred anchoring methodare presented. We conclude by discussingthe decisionmaking circumstances under whichutilities and QALY estimates for children and adults need to be commensurate in order to achieve allocative efficiency.
