The EQ Health and Wellbeing (EQ-HWB) is a new generic measure that has been developed internationally for evaluating interventions in health, public health, and social care, including the impact on patients, social care users, and carers. A range of recent validation studies have evaluated the psychometric properties of the EQ-HWB-S, suggesting that it is reliable and valid. When the EQ-HWB-S instrument is finalised we expect a range of preference weights (value-sets) will be produced across countries to generate utility values for calculating QALYs (quality adjusted life years) for use in Health Technology Assessment. In preparation for this, there have been several studies conducted over the past few years that have tested different methods for generating preference weights. This work has been undertaken due to the differences in valuing the EQ-HWB-S measure with its wide range of domains that move beyond health, and the large number of items (9 items). Preference weight generation methodologies that have been tested to date, and which have produced indicative value sets for the EQ-HWB-S include: 1) composite time trade-off (cTTO) and a discrete choice experiment (DCE), known as the UK pilot preference weights 2) PAPRIKA, which stands for “Potentially All Pairwise RanKings of all Possible Alternatives” and 3) DCE with a duration attribute and DCE-triplet design with “dead” (a EuroQol funded PhD project). The UK pilot preference weights have been used extensively in recent validation studies; however, the effect of the preference weights on psychometric properties is not yet well understood. In much of the data we have on caregivers, we see high levels of exhaustion, loneliness, anxiety and lack of control. However, the preference weights for exhaustion, loneliness, cognition, anxiety and lack of control (psycho-social items) are smaller compared to pain, mobility and daily activities (the physical items). By this, we mean that utility decrements are smaller for the items where more severity is observed for caregivers, suggesting that impairment for these items will have a relatively smaller impact on utilities and hence QALYs. Aims In our proposed study, we are interested in whether the differences in EQ-HWB-S scores calculated when preference weights are applied affect relevant psychometric outcomes. We aim to investigate whether study outcomes and psychometric outcomes (including known-group validity and change over time) are affected by how the EQ-HWB-S is scored. Abstract Method Procedure We will use five high quality datasets from a range of countries (including Australia, Canada, Europe, United Kingdom (UK), United States (US)), from cross-sectional and longitudinal studies. Our studies include a range of relevant populations, such as caregivers of children where families have experienced adversity, parents of children with health conditions, participants with mental health conditions, and general population samples. We will assess three indicative preference-weights: UK pilot, PAPRIKA, and DCE-duration/DCE-triplet. Abstract Statistical Analysis We will compare sum-scores and preference-weighted scores through: 1) assessing mean differences, 2) comparing rate of agreement between index- and sum-scores using Bland-Altman plot and Lin’s concordance correlation coefficient (CCC), 3) comparing Cohen’s d scores from known-group validity analysis, and 4) assessing differences in change over time data.
