Introduction: Self-report is the preferred method for measuring children’s health-related quality of life (HRQoL) outcomes. However, children younger than eight years may not always be able to self-report their HRQoL using measures presented in standard text formats, as reading and completing a written questionnaire can be challenging, especially for young children and those with severe health conditions. Consequently, some HRQoL measures, including the EQ-5D-Y, recommend proxy completion for children younger than eight years. However, research is lacking on whether pictorially augmented measures can enhance self-reporting alongside standard text. For the EQ-5D-Y, the most widely used preference-based measure in children, there has been no research into using a pictorial version for children aged 4-7 years to explore the possibility of extending the self-reported age range and supplementing reporting using standard text.  Aims: This exploratory study will investigate whether a range of pictorial enhancements at dimension and response scale levels can support younger children's understanding and completion of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L. The equivalence of the pictorially enhanced and text-only versions of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L will be qualitatively assessed. This exploratory work will test several pictorial formats for all five dimensions of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L (‘mobility (walking about)’, ‘looking after myself’, ‘doing usual activities’, ‘having pain or discomfort’ and ‘feeling worried, sad and unhappy’) for children ages 4-7 years. Additionally, the research will investigate any disparities in the acceptability and feasibility of the pictorial enhancements between the 3L and 5L versions of the EQ-5D-Y. Methods: This study will focus on the descriptive system of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L and will consist of two stages. (1) Design a series of candidate test images for the five EQ-5D-Y-3L and 5L dimensions, including separate test images representing each response level of the dimensions, and (2) conduct face-to-face semi structured interviews and expert panel discussions to explore the acceptability and feasibility of using the pictorial formats of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and Y5L instruments on a sample of healthy children and paediatric patients. All interviews, face-to-face semi structured interviews and expert panel discussions will be audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim, and analysed using a thematic analysis approach.
