Introduction: EQ-5D-Y is one of the commonly used generic health-related quality of life (HRQoL) measures. As has been done before, cultural adaptation and testing the psychometric properties of the instruments have crucial implications for measuring health-related quality of life (HRQoL) outcomes, resource allocation, and the planning of healthcare interventions in child and youth populations in Ethiopia. This study aimed to assess and compare the measurement properties of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L among school children and adolescents, as well as those with a range of health conditions. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted to collect data among children and adolescents aged 8-15 years. Data were collected from mainstream schools and government hospitals in Addis Ababa. All the participants self-completed the EQ-5D-Y-3L, EQ-5D-Y-5L, and the self-rated health question. Both instruments were compared for their feasibility, ceiling effect, redistribution, informativity, test-retest reliability, and known groups’ validity. Cohen’s Kappa agreement and ICC were used to assess the test-retest reliability and ANOVA with post hoc Tukey test was used to confirm the known-group validity of the instruments by comparing groups with prior expected differences. Data was analyzed using IBM SPSS statistics 26, where a p-value of <0.05 was considered significant. Results: A total of 473 children and adolescents (comprising those with diagnoses of CHF, asthma, acute leukemia, and also school children and adolescents) with a mean (SD) age of 14.62 (1.89) years completed both instruments. There were a few missing values of 3.8% for Y-3L and 4.2% for Y-5L, suggesting comparable feasibility. The ceiling effect was reduced from 52% for Y-3L to 45.8% for Y-5L (by 12.0% in general). The proportion of inconsistencies was relatively low (4.4%-7.0%) across dimensions moving from Y-3L to Y-5L, and redistribution was cross-checked for all 35 3L-5L-level combinations. Regarding informativity, the Y-5L demonstrated more discriminatory power, indicated by having a higher Shannon diversity index in all domains of the Y-5L compared with the Y-3L. Both Y-3L and Y-5L showed moderate to substantial agreement on test-retest reliability across dimensions, EQ-VAS, and LSS scores. The known-group validity was confirmed for both the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L i.e., both instruments seemed to do well at detecting differences between healthy (school) children/adolescents and patients with disease conditions (p<0.05). Conclusion: The Afaan-Oromo language version of the Y-5L appears to improve the measurement properties; reducing the ceiling effect, improving discriminatory power, and achieving higher test-retest reliability agreement compared to the Y-3L. Both instruments had similar feasibility and confirmed known-group validity.
