Background: The Paediatric and Adolescent Wellness Service (PAWS) at KK Women's and Children's Hospital (KKH), Singapore’s largest public hospital specialising in women’s and children’s healthcare, was established in 2022 for children and adolescents with mild to moderate mental health conditions. To enhance service evaluation and patient management, PAWS is interested in incorporating EQ-5D-Y into its routine patient-reported outcomes measures (PROMs) data collection. However, several practical concerns need to be addressed. First, the currently approved electronic formats of EQ-5D-Y are in the forms of REDCap, Qualtrics, and LimeSurvey, none of which is suitable for long-term data collection at KKH because of both data security and platform-related cost concerns. Like all other public hospitals in Singapore, PAWS has been collecting patient-/caregiver-reported data using Form-SG (https://form.gov.sg), a free and secure platform developed by the Singapore government. The EQ-5D-Y questionnaire implemented in Form-SG is similar to, but not exactly the same as the approved electronic versions. It is unknown if the Form-SG powered EQ-5D-Y questionnaire has acceptable measurement properties. Besides, it is necessary to specify the age thresholds for self-reported and proxy-reported EQ-5D-Y-5L. However, the minimum age at which children with mental health conditions or symptoms can reliably self-complete the EQ-5D-Y-5L—and the age below which it should be completed by a proxy—remain unanswered. This lack of guidance poses challenges for routine implementation in clinical settings and may lead to inconsistent use, reduced data quality, and limited comparability across settings and over time. In addition, the use of EQ-5D-Y in the paediatric setting often face the problem of transitioning from EQ-5D-Y to EQ-5D-5L when the child or adolescent grows into adultohood as understanding about the comparability between EQ-5D-Y and EQ-5D-5L is limited.  Aims: This proposal aims to support the integration of EQ-5D-Y-5L into the routine PROMs data collection at PAWS and to facilitate the transition from EQ-5D-Y-5L to EQ-5D-5L. The transition from EQ-5D-Y to EQ-5D is inevitable in longitudinal data collection from adolescents. Little research has been done to understand at what age the transition should start. While it is not a pressing issue for integrating EQ-5D-Y into PAWS, insight about the optimal transition age would be useful in the long term.  Therefore, there are three specific objectives: (1) to develop the Form-SG powered EQ-5D-Y-5L questionnaire, including both self-complete and proxy versions, in children who visit the PAWS clinic for treatment of mental health conditions or symptoms and to evaluate their measurement properties; (2) to explore the minimum age at which children with mental health conditions or symptoms can reliably self-complete the EQ-5D-Y-5L questionnaire; and (3) to assess the comparability between EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-5L among adolescents.  Methods: The project will be carried out in two phases. In Phase 1, we will develop Form-SG powered EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-5L questionnaires, followed by a qualitative testing with children visiting PAWS and their caregivers. In Phase 2, we will incorporate the Form-SG powered EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-5L questionnaires into PAWS’s current system for routine longitudinal data collection. The data collected in Phase 2 will be used to assess the psychometric properties of the EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-5L questionnaires including construct validity, test-retest reliability, responsiveness, and patient-proxy agreement. Besides, the data collected at Phase 2 will be used to compare the psychometric properties of EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-5L.
