Originally the study was aimed to investigate the impact of heart disease patients’ demographic, socioeconomic, and disease characteristics on the valuation of EQ-5D-5L health states. That is, investigate to what extent these characteristics affect differences in valuation between heart disease patients and the general population. As an EQ-5D-5L valuation study in the Singapore general population was ongoing at that time, we planned to recruit only heart disease patients and use the data from the Singaporean general population value set study to achieve the planned objectives. However, the official Singapore general population value set for EQ-5D-5L is still not available, so we decided to publish the valuation data from heart disease patients only. We still aim to compare the valuation data from heart disease patients and the general population once the official value set will be available. Below is the abstract of the publication based on heart disease patient data only. Objectives: Several studies have shown that patients with heart disease value hypothetical health states differently from the general population. We aimed to investigate the health preferences of patients with heart disease and develop a value set for the 5-level EQ-5D (EQ-5D-5L) based on these patient preferences. Methods: Patients with confirmed heart disease were recruited from 2 hospitals in Singapore. A total of 86 EQ-5D-5L health states (10 per patient) were valued using a composite time trade-off method according to the international valuation protocol for EQ-5D-5L; 20-parameter linear models and 8-parameter cross-attribute level effects models with and without an N45 term (indicating whether any health state dimension at level 4 or 5 existed) were estimated. Each model included patient-specific random intercepts. Model performance was evaluated for out-of-sample and in-sample predictive accuracy in terms of root mean square error. The discriminative ability of the utility values was assessed using heart disease-related functional classes. Results: A total of 576 patients were included in the analysis. The preferred model, with the lowest out-of-sample root mean square error, was a 20-parameter linear model including N45. Predicted utility values ranged from 20.727 for the worst state to 1 for full health; the value for the second-best state was 0.981. Utility values demonstrated good discriminative ability in differentiating among patients of varied functional classes. Conclusions: An EQ-5D-5L value set representing the preferences of patients with heart disease was developed. The value set could be used for patient-centric economic evaluation and health-related quality of life assessment for patients with heart disease.
