The EQ-5D-5L is the most widely used generic measure of health-related quality of life; it is commonly applied in health economic evaluations and population health surveys to inform policy decision making. However, despite its widespread use, the EQ-5D-5L is generally not used in clinical practice on the individual patient level. A major barrier for use in routine care is the lack of an easy way to summarise and convey the complex information contained in EQ-5D-5L health states. It would be inappropriate to apply a social value set to an individual patient, since the preference weights would not reflect the patients’ view of what aspects of their health are most important to them . Other methods for summarising changes on the five dimensions are also not patient-centric: the level sum score is too crude, and psychometric methods would still rely on group-level statistical analyses. None of these are meaningful to any single patient reporting their EQ-5D health state profile. A newly developed health valuation method, called Online elicitation of Personal Utility Functions (OPUF) approach, has the potential to overcome this barrier. The OPUF approach can generate personal EQ-5D-5L value sets, for each respondent. In principle this would allow patients to both self-report their health on the EQ-5D-5L, and (using OPUF) to communicate which aspects of their health problems are most important in determining their overall health related quality of life, from their own perspective. This can provide important information of relevance to decisions to treat, and choices between treatments, allowing clinicians to better understand which health problems are most bothersome to patients, and how side effects of treatments can impact their HRQoL. It might allow summarising changes in health states over time in terms of (personal) utility, which may help patients to better understand the EQ-5D-5L and the trade-offs they face in making treatment decisions. This line of research is in its very early stages. We thus propose a small research project with limited scope, to map opportunities, barriers, stakeholders, potential use cases, etc. For this, we will conduct a targeted literature review, and semi-structured expert interviews. Findings will be summarised in a (future-state) patient journey map, and used to inform an internal discussion and a roadmap for further research for consideration by the Executive Committee.
