The literature supports the idea that health states are usually valued more positively when they are experienced than when they are imagined. However, health valuation-related papers typically disregard the role of experience in the reported values. Several authors have explored the impact of experience on Time Trade-Off (TTO) valuation tasks, but the evidence is weak, fragmented, and often mixed. To better understand variations in responses to TTO questions, we need to understand the characteristics of the respondents behind TTO responses. In the first part of this project, we investigate the conceptual basis for ‘experience’ and elaborate the idea of experience-based values under the knowledge or informed value viewpoint. To the classical interpretation of experience (personal experience related to the past or present), we add two additional elements of experience. Firstly, personal experience related to the future (for example, health states that a person pictures in their future). Secondly, vicarious affective experience (knowing someone close who has experienced a severe illness), distinguishing between two levels of proximity: affective and non-affective. We also examine how experience is tackled in the literature related to health valuation. A general result is that any experience with the health state being valued appears to be associated with higher values. In addition, the effect of personal experience on the valuation seems to be larger than that of vicarious experience (knowing someone who is living or has lived in a particular health state). In the second part of the project, we estimate the effect of different forms of experience on health state valuations following the TTO protocol. Following two approaches, we analyse the TTO value sets for EQ-5D-3L health profiles of the UK, Netherlands, Denmark, and Spain. The first approach analyses the impact of personal experience of a health state (in the present) on the valuation of each hypothetical health profile. The second approach analyses the effect of personal experience (in the past or present) and vicarious experience of serious illness on the valuation of hypothetical health profiles. In both approaches, we run linear regressions of the TTO valuation as a function of experience and age, sex, education level, and country. Personal, present experience-based values for TTO are typically higher than the non-experienced-based values. Results also indicate that individuals with experience of serious illness in others (vicarious), give lower values than those who do not experience severe illness at all. This effect seems smaller if we restrict vicarious experience to those close ones (vicarious, affective). These results come with caveats, as the different experience groups we are comparing relate to small sample sizes, and the lack of more granular information about the degree of experience limits the interpretation of the results. Further research is necessary to understand the role of experience fully.
