While, traditionally, economic evaluations considered the costs and benefits of the person receiving care only, recent international guidelines on conducting economic evaluations recommend including costs and benefits of informal carers when adopting a societal perspective. In the UK, the ‘Health-Related Quality of Life Task & Finish Group’ (HRQOL T&F group) that was initiated by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) put together a set of ‘minimum evidence requirements’, recommending that carer quality of life (QoL) should be measured using the EQ-5D. Given these recent developments, there is an urgent need for further research, examining how carer QoL can be included in health economic evaluation using the EQ-5D. This requires the assessment of the appropriateness of the EQ-5D in capturing caregiving impacts when compared with other QoL measures. Additionally, incorporating carer outcomes, also referred to as ‘spillover effects’, into health economic evaluation requires further investigation into the extent of potential ‘double-counting’. It has been argued that spillover effects may already be implicitly included in patient’s utilities. Finally, there are challenges in combining ‘carer QALYs’ and ‘patient QALYs’ in an economic evaluation that requires further research.  The aim of this PhD research program is to address current methodological issues concerning the inclusion of carer outcomes in health economic evaluation using the EQ-5D tools. This ambitious program of research will address the following research questions: (1) What is the psychometric performance of the EQ-5D tools in capturing carer outcomes for use in economic evaluation? (2) What is the extent of double-counting when including carer outcomes in economic evaluation using the EQ-5D? (3) Should ‘carer QALYs’ be weighted differently than ‘patient QALYs’ in economic evaluation? A systematic literature review will be undertaken, examining the performance of the EQ-5D tools in capturing carer outcomes. Additionally, a secondary data analysis will be conducted, assessing the psychometric properties of the EQ-5D-5L in informal carers in Australia. The extent to which members of the general public consider spillover effects when valuing EQ-5D health states will be examined in a time trade-off exercise, supplemented with some think-aloud interviews. Finally, an online survey, comprising a person trade-off exercise, will be administered to a representative sample in Australia, assessing whether the general public assigns different weights to ‘patient QALYs’ and ‘carer QALYs’ The PhD student will be based at Monash University within the School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, supervised by EuroQol member Dr Lidia Engel. Additional supervisory support will be provided by Prof Cathy Mihalopoulos (Monash University) to meet Australian University guidelines around supervisory panels.
