Background: In recent years, new treatment options for psoriasis and atopic dermatitis (AD) have advanced significantly. However, their high costs impose significant financial burdens on patients and healthcare systems, underscoring the need for cost-utility analyses. EQ-5D, the most widely used instrument for measuring health-related quality of life worldwide, has been found to be deficient in capturing important health aspects in chronic skin conditions. Therefore, this study aimed to  investigate the psychometric properties of adding four bolt-ons (skin irritation (SI), self-confidence (SE), social relationships (SR), and sleep(SL)) compared to the standard EQ-5D-5L, PROMIS-29 and Skindex-16 instruments in adult patients with psoriasis or atopic dermatitis (AD).Methods: This study comprised two sequential phases. The first phase focused on translation of four EQ bolt-ons into standard Arabic following the EuroQol's translation guidelines and evaluation of their content validity. The second phase collected health-related quality of life data from patients with psoriasis and AD using the EQ-5D-5L, EQ bolt-ons, PROMIS-29, and Skindex-16. Participants self-completed the questionnaires at baseline, after 3–7 days for test–retest reliability, and after 12 weeks for responsiveness. Psychometric analyses at baseline examined ceiling effects, informativity, validity, explanatory power, known-group differences, feasibility, and general performance using both dimension-level and standardized Level Sum Scores (LSS).Results: The standard Arabic version of the four EQ bolt-ons was well understood and culturally appropriate. Their inclusion expanded the EQ-5D’s content coverage from 55% to 81%, with SI and SL identified as the most relevant. A conceptual overlap was noted between the SI bolt-on and the Pain/Discomfort dimension in four out of five interviews. Feasibility was confirmed by the absence of missing responses. The greatest reduction in the ceiling effect occurred with SI (100%), followed by SL (61.8%). The highest informativity was achieved when all four bolt-ons were included (Hʹ = 7.83). Known-group validity analyses showed superior relative efficiency compared to the standard EQ-5D-5L. In psoriasis, EQ-5D-5L+SI had the strongest explanatory power for EQ-VAS variation (51%), while in AD, the version with all four bolt-ons explained 39%. EQ-VAS and standardized LSS showed good reliability across all versions in psoriasis, and moderate to good reliability in AD. Adding the bolt-ons, particularly SI alone or all four combined, improved the responsiveness of the EQ-5D-5L in the “improved” group, reaching medium to large effect sizes. Discussion: Overall, the addition of the four bolt-ons enhanced the psychometric performance of the EQ-5D-5L, although the extent of improvement differed by bolt-on and condition. In AD, the inclusion of SL had a greater impact on improving EQ-5D-5L psychometrics than in Ps. This is expected since sleep problems are highly prevalent in AD, often driven by nocturnal itching and pain. In contrast, SI had the greatest impact in Ps. Conversely, SE and SR provided smaller beneficial effect which may be partly explained by the fact that 72% of our sample had low-to-medium educational levels. Previous research has shown that educational and socioeconomic differences can influence self-esteem, with individuals of higher education often reporting lower self-esteem. Moreover, their moderate responsiveness also aligned with patients’ feedback during content validation phase that improvements in these dimensions would occur only after lesion clearance. Given that few patients who achieved complete recovery within 12 weeks, a longer follow-up may reveal stronger responsiveness.   The addition of the four bolt-ons improved the EQ-5D-5L’s ability to discriminate between smaller orders of improvement, complementing prior evidence of enhanced responsiveness observed in EQ-PSO (which includes the Skin Irritation and Self-Confidence bolt-ons) in clinical trials. However, the inclusion of bolt-ons had minimal impact on responsiveness among patients whose conditions worsened. Although the mean standardized LSS declined significantly, the effect size remained smaller than that of the standard EQ-5D-5L. This reduced sensitivity can be attributed to the high proportion of patients who, at baseline, already reported moderate-to-extreme problems on the Skin Irritation and Sleep dimensions, creating a floor effect that limited responsiveness to further deterioration.Conclusion: The findings support the clarity, cultural appropriateness, and comprehensibility of the four Arabic bolt-ons, even among individuals with lower educational levels. Adding the bolt-ons to EQ-5D-5L eliminated the ceiling effect, improved absolute informativity, enhanced explanatory power for VAS variation, and increased discriminatory ability across disease severities. Also, responsiveness to smaller health changes over a three months follow-up period improved while maintaining good feasibility and test-retest reliability.
