The EQ-5D is the most widely used preference-based measure of health-related quality of life and is applied widely in clinical studies and economic evaluations. However, its core dimensions may not capture outcomes that are particularly important for older adults, such as sensory and cognitive functioning, which are critical for independence and social engagement. EuroQol has developed bolt-ons for vision, hearing and cognition to improve content validity of the EQ-5D for populations with sensory or cognitive impairments. For older Australians, many of whom experience age-related hearing loss, memory loss, cataract, glaucoma, or macular degeneration, it is important to understand how these bolt-ons perform and whether they are relevant and clear.This study will generate qualitative evidence on the content validity and feasibility of the EQ-5D-5L vision, hearing, and cognition bolt-ons—both the best available and exploratory versions from the Toolbox—among older Australians. It will explore how participants understand and interpret the bolt-ons, including alternative wording and references to assistive devices such as glasses or hearing aids, assess their relevance and clarity for people with sensory impairments, and identify suggestions for refining wording and response options.We will conduct a qualitative study with 30 community-dwelling older adults aged 65 and above: 10 with vision impairment, 10 with hearing impairment, and 10 with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Participants will be recruited via a professional agency to ensure diversity in age, gender, severity, and use of assistive devices. Participants will first complete the EQ-5D-5L with the bolt-ons , followed by a semi-structured interview exploring comprehension, interpretation, relevance, the impact of assistive devices, and ease of completion. Interviews will be audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim, and analysed thematically. Two researchers will independently code transcripts and resolve differences through discussion or by involving a third member of the research team. Themes will be mapped against the EQ-5D-5L and bolt-on constructs to examine content coverage, clarity, and conceptual overlap. Data collection and analysis will be modified to incorporate elements of the content validity protocol for Toolbox testing.The study will provide evidence on how older adults interpret the mentioned bolt-ons, the influence of assistive devices, and recommendations to improve content validity and usability. Findings will directly inform EuroQol’s Bolt-On Toolbox and support evidence-based guidance for the application of these bolt-ons in older adults, contributing to the broader goal of enhancing the EQ-5D’s sensitivity and relevance in this key population.
