In our study, we evaluated the feasibility of interval Time Trade-Off (iTTO) as a potential TTO variant that permits response intervals rather than discrete indifference points. We aimed to determine if iTTO reduces the cognitive challenges often seen in regular cTTO (cTTO) without sacrificing data quality. In an EQ-5D-5L valuation experiment, 100 participants were randomly assigned to either cTTO or iTTO. The iTTO tasks were designed to terminate after 15 movements or when respondents cycled around a 0.1-width interval. Since the entire response paths were stored, we could explore different termination rules, specifically examining rules based on a maximum number of Iterative Steps and Interval Width (IS-IW) and the Two Directional Changes approach (TDC). Task complexity metrics were based on task completion time, movements, and participant feedback. We assessed inconsistencies and value clustering at 1, 0.5, 0, -0.5 and -1 across both arms. We assessed model performance using mean standard error, Akaike Information Criterion, and Bayesian Information Criterion though a 20-parameter hybrid model that combined cTTO and iTTO data with discrete choice experiment data from a previous study in the same population. Our findings indicate that iTTO led to faster task completion times, more movements, and enhanced self-reported comprehension. iTTO reduced value clustering with no significant differences in inconsistencies. The relative precision of models developed through both cTTO and iTTO methodologies was nearly identical. In conclusion, iTTO emerges as a promising alternative to cTTO for health state valuations. iTTO has the potential to improve participants' comprehension and efficiency in completing tasks while limiting the impact of satisficing and preserving model precision. Among the tested iTTO termination rules, we particularly recommend the TDC approach. Further research is needed to assess iTTO in diverse populations and with alternative iterative procedures.
