Background: Approximately 3% of children worldwide have intellectual disability (ID). This population is highly heterogeneous. These children have poorer health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and higher healthcare costs than the general population, as ID is associated with various co-morbidities, (e.g., behaviour disorders, epilepsy). Aims: To examine the test-retest reliability, concurrent validity, and content validity of the EQ-5D-Y-5L for children with ID. Methods: There were 2 studies: a survey and a qualitative interview study. In the survey study, caregivers of children with ID were invited to complete an online questionnaire. To examine the concurrent validity of the EQ-5D-Y-5L, the questionnaire included the EQ-5D-Y-5L and scales validated for children with ID, for each of the 5 dimensions of Mobility (MO); Self-Care (SC); Usual Activities (UA); Pain and Discomfort (PD); and worry, sadness, unhappiness (AD), as well as an overall measure of HRQoL: the Quality of Life Inventory-Disability (QI-Disability). To examine test-retest reliability, a subgroup of participants completed the EQ-5D-Y-5L again within a month. The qualitative interview study involved cognitive think-aloud interviews with caregivers of children with ID. Participants completed the EQ-5D-Y-5L for their child while commenting on the rationale for their scores. They were also asked about the content validity (relevance, comprehensibility, and comprehensiveness) of the questions for this population. Results: The survey was completed by 234 caregivers of children with ID (aged 4–17 years), 21 of whom completed the EQ-5D-Y-5L twice, on average 18.6 days apart (range: 9-32 days). Qualitative interviews were completed with caregivers of 28 children with ID (aged 8–22 years). Survey data indicated that: • test-retest reliability was moderate to excellent for the 5 EQ-5D-Y-5L dimensions, but poor for the 100-point EQ-5D-Y-5L visual analogue scale (VAS). • concurrent validity was moderate to good for MO, SC, PD, AD, and VAS, but poor to moderate for UA. Interview data indicated that: • comprehensibility was excellent for all questions. • participants considered that UA, PD, AD were all relevant to HRQoL, but opinions differed regarding the relevance of MO and SC. • mapping of rationales for responses to EQ-5D-Y-5L scores was moderate to good for all but the VAS. • interview participants thought the EQ-5D-Y-5L insufficiently comprehensive to capture the HRQoL of children with ID, and recommended adding questions about communication, social engagement, supports and equipment required, and broader questions about mental health. Conclusions: The EQ-5D-Y-5L is a brief measure of HRQoL for children with ID that is easy to understand and complete. It has generally moderate concurrent validity against ID-specific scales. Test-retest reliability may be affected by true fluctuations in health states in this population. It lacks the comprehensiveness of longer scales, and may usefully be supplemented by additional questions about communication, social engagement, supports, and mental health.
