Background:It is accepted that the EQ-5D may miss dimensions relevant for some conditions. Whenthis happens, a possible solution is adding bolt-ons to expand its descriptive system. A recent study has identified eight candidate bolt-ons for the EQ-5D-5L: relationships, hearing, life satisfaction, speech, cognition, vision, energy/vitality and sleep (Finch et al., 2016). Developing and incorporating bolt-ons into EQ-5D values sets is complex and costly, so it is important to establish which ones are likely to impact on preferences. This study teststhe use of pairwise choices for the selection of bolt-on dimensions by examininghow bolt-ons alter public preferences for the EQ-5D-5L health states. Methods:Preferences of the general population were collected using an online survey of 1040 UK residents. The survey presented participants with pairwise choices of EQ-5D-5L health states without and with bolt-ons of hearing, sleeping, cognition, energy and relationships. Three health state pairs were chosen among those where responders’ preferences were in approximately equal proportions in the discrete choice experiment of the EQ-5D-5L value set for England study (Devlin et al., 2016). Participants were asked to imagine living in those health states for 10 years and then die, and to choose their preferred state. To assess whether bolt-ons changed preferencesstatistical testing of differences in proportions of responses between the pairwise choices without bolt-ons and the corresponding pairwise choices with the bolt-ons wasperformed using Z tests. Todiscriminate and help inform the selection between bolt-ons, differences in the proportions of preferences between bolt-on at the same level for the same health state pairs were tested using Z tests.Results:Each of the individual bolt-ons had a significant impact on preferences for the EQ-5D-5L. The extent of this impact varied according to the bolt-ons and their severity level, as well as the health states to which they were added. Additions of bolt-ons at level 1 generally resulted in differences of ± 10 percentage pointscompared to the same pairwise choice without bolt-ons. These were not statistically significant. Additions of bolt-ons at level 3 generally produced a statistically significant reduction in the percentage ofindividuals choosing the health state to which the moderate level was added. Addition of bolt-ons at level 5 produced a further reduction. At level 5 hearing had the largest impact, followed by energy, cognition and relationships with similar impacts, andsleeping with the smallest impact. By contrast, at severity level 3 cognition producedthe largest switch in preferences, followed by hearing, relationships and sleep, with energy registering the smallest switch. Conclusions:Use ofsimple pairwise comparisons of health states is a feasible technique toassess the potential importance of bolt-ons. However, the relative weight responders place on different health problems is not constant across levels of severity between bolt-ons.
