BACKGROUND: The reliability of raters is important to evaluate in quality of life research. For instance, proxy raters may be sought when patients have difficulty to respond on their own behalf. It is, thus, vital to understand how multiple assessments interrelate and develop informative measures of concordance (MCs). However, commonly used MCs have limitations. Pearson’s (Spearman’s ) correlation coefficient, 𝜌, focuses on the quality of fit, not reflecting systematic differences in scores. Linear regression coefficients, 𝛼, are diluted (drawn towards 0) and heteroscedasticity can beproblematic. Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) may face conceptual difficulties as the observations are not exchangeable (patient vs proxy) and the judges vary between pairs. Additionally, all of the above (but regression coefficients) are symmetric. Our aim was to propose the use of MCs derived from fuzzy set theory and illustrate their usefulness. METHODS: Data from a longitudinal natural history of stroke study was used, which included patient & proxy assessments of the EQ-5D-3L (n=124 dyads). We focused on the EQ VAS assessment in four waves (months: 0, 1, 3, and 6). VAS assessments were rescaled into [0,1] intervals, and the score was interpreted as a membership function from fuzzy set theory measuring how much a given patient’s health state resembles perfect health. We first defined several asymmetric MCs measuring the degree to which a patient considering their own state as perfect (say, 𝑥 ∈[0, 1]) implies the proxy considering this state perfect (𝑦∈[0, 1]), or vice versa. For that purpose we used various OR operators (Zadeh, bounded sum, product) along with 𝑥 ⇒𝑦⇔¬𝑥∨𝑦 equivalence. We then defined the both-way counterparts as conjunction of implications plus a ratio of a (scalar) cardinality of intersection and of union. All the measures yield values in [0,1]. The results were averaged for the whole dataset. We measured the asymmetry of implications as the difference between 𝑥⇒𝑦 and 𝑦⇒𝑥. Bootstrapping was used to calculate 95% confidence intervals (95%CI).RESULTS: For the first wave we obtained standard MCs: 𝜌= 0. 359, 𝛼= 0. 301 or 𝛼= 0. 427(explaining patient with proxy, or vice versa, notably both <1), 𝐼𝐼𝐼(2, 1)= 0. 31. We got the assessment of patient ⇒ proxy with fuzzy measures in the range 0.583–0.858 and of proxy ⇒patient: 0.678–0.953. The implication was stronger in the latter direction (statistically significant, i.e. bootstrap 95%CI above 0 for all the measures). The differences for other waves did not show this significance. Hence, considering a given state as perfect by proxy implies agreeing by patient (considering health worsened by patient implies agreeing by proxy) more strongly than vice versa, but the asymmetry disappears in time. The symmetric MCs for the first wave ranged from 0.536–0.811 (0.711 for ratio of cardinalities).DISCUSSION: Concordance between various utility assessments can be defined using fuzzy set approach, also allowing to define a directed (asymmetric) version, and reflect possibly non-trivial interrelations. Statistical inference is still possible, e.g. via bootstrapping. To build on this basic conceptual framework, future research and testing on different datasets will help to verify properties and enhance interpretation of the results.
