BACKGROUND: The AWESOME project aims to generate new evidence regarding challenges with the current wording of the four EQ-5D instruments and to identify possible wording improvements. Stage 1, detailed here, intended to provide empirical evidence, harvested from the cognitive debriefing (CD) reports of routine translation, to support the need for the larger project. OBJECTIVES AND METHODS Drawing on the VMC repository, cognitive debriefing (CD) reports were analysed to identify the range and nature of wording issues identified during translation. The specific objectives were to: a) Establish the range, nature and frequency of wording issues identified during CD. b) Identify the range and type of solutions offered to translators to overcome these problems, and to note how often and in which languages (and language groups) such solutions are implemented. d) Explore if certain respondent characteristics are related to these reported problems (e.g. age, health condition, etc.). A mixed methodology was used to analyse 87 cognitive debriefing (CD). These reports comprised eight 3L, 32 5L, 36 Y-3L and 11 Y-5L versions from 54 countries and included 55 unique languages and 633 respondents (296 adults and 337 children). RESULTS: Comprehension Issues: Approximately 47% of respondents provided one or more responses to probing questions indicating an interpretation of EQ-5D terms which deviated from the EuroQol’s official Definition of Concepts document. Four main problem types were identified: • Interpretation: Difficulties in understanding high register terms such as “mobility” or “anxiety”; broader interpretation of defined concepts. • Qualifier Comprehension: Variability in interpreting severity qualifiers, particularly the mid-level qualifiers (2nd level in the 3L versions and 2nd and 3rd level in the 5L versions). • Non-Health Centered Examples: E.g., responses influenced by developmental stages (mostly children) rather than health-centered examples, particularly in the Self-care dimension and Depression/Anxiety dimensions. • Dual constructs in the same dimension causing confusion: E.g., in the dimension heading (e.g. Pain or Discomfort) or dissonance between heading and level descriptors (e.g., Mobility and Walking about). Translatability Challenges: Difficulty in finding equivalent terms in the target language for concepts led to the use of alternate words to the English source in 61 of the 87 translations (70%) (e.g., Worried instead of Anxious in the adult versions). OUTCOMES As per the primary intended outcome, commonly misunderstood words and phrases and possible alternative words and phrases were identified to be tested in Stage 2. The results have been presented in the 2024 Copenhagen and Noordwijk EruroQol meetings and shared with the AWESOME Team and the VMC to inform the formulation of alternative versions to be empirically tested during Stage 2. Additionally, a comprehensive list of all words or phrases that have proved challenging, and the suggested alternative phrasing that was approved by reviewers, has been developed and these are in the process of incorporation into the Definition of Concepts document. This extended glossary will further assist in standardisation of any changes required to ensure cultural acceptability RECOMMENDATIONS: 1. Proceed with AWESOME Stage 2 to empirically test proposed alterations in collaboration with the VMC. This could potentially lead to simplified English wording more easily translated into other languages. 2. Work with the wider VMC to expand the VMC Definition of Concepts documents to include acceptable alternatives for semantic equivalence. CONCLUSION: EQ-5D instruments show overall linguistic and conceptual validity, yet the range and frequency of deviations from the defined concepts indicate the need for improvement to enhance cross-cultural comparability and age-appropriate continuity.
