1.Background:The development of the EQ-5D-Y, an outcome measure of HRQoL in children, was undertakenby an international task team and published in 2010 (1). Following the feasibility, reliability and validity studies,undertaken in the main with typically developing children, a recommendation was made to apply the measure in a longitudinal, clinical study to determine its responsiveness to change over a period of time and to monitor effects of treatment (2). .2Aim:The overall aim of the study was thereforeto investigate thepsychometric properties and feasibilityand usefulness of the EQ-5D-Ywhen used to monitor the HRQoL of children within different institutional contexts. This included monitoring the changes in HRQoL over time,assessingthe feasibility of the process of data collection as well as examining how useful the collected data were to the health providers.3Methods:Ethical approval was gained from the Human Research Ethics Committee of the University of Cape Town. A longitudinal, analytical descriptive study design wasused within four different contexts. Children were recruited from a mainstream school(MS); aconvalescent homefor children with chronic diseases(Chronic Centre, CC); special school (SS) for childrenwith physical disabilities and an acute care (AC) hospital. The EQ-5D-Y was the primary outcome measure. The PedsQL(1)was used as a parallel measure to assess HRQoL andthe WeeFIM(2)to assess function.Appropriatelanguage versions of each instrument were used (i.e. English, Afrikaans and isiXhosa, translated under the direction of the researcher if no version available). Repeated measures were taken at three month intervals, or, in the case of acutely ill children, at admission and at discharge. A self-designed questionnaire was used during interviews with the therapists who were treating the childrento assess feasibility and usefulness.4Results:4.1ParticipantsA total of 224 children were recruited, approximately 130 from the Institutions and 100 from the MS (See Figure 1). The mean age of the children at the various institutions was 10.5 years (Standard Deviation (SD) =1.45), with a minimum age of 7.0 years and a maximum of 13.8 yearsand therewas no significant difference in the mean ages between the institutions (p=.379).Health conditions ranged from cerebral palsy(18), to spina bifida (10)spina bifida, HIV(8) and diiabetes, muscle diseases, neoplasms, appendicitis and joint injuries.
