The main aim of this project was to propose appropriate conceptual models for the measure EQ VAS. To achieve these aims, we 1) gathered and summarized existing knowledge on conceptual frameworks for the measure EQ VAS; and b) empirically tested these models by investigating the principal factors associated with variation of EQ VAS in secondary data. The principal objective of this project is strategic in that we hope to encourage the development of a more broadly-based program of work centered on EQ VAS. Methods Part 1: To understand existing knowledge, theoretical or empirical, regarding the conceptual model framing the EQ VAS measure, we conducted a systematic review which included an electronic review of published data and reviewing the grey literature. The electronic review systematically searched publications from PubMed/Medline with pre-determined inclusion and exclusion criteria. Abstracts and full text were considered for inclusion and then reviewed by coinvestigators YSF and LCH. Appropriate grey literature as well as papers missed by keyword search were identified by interviewing key members of the EuroQol group as well as reviewing EuroQol conference proceedings. Part 2: Because we could not identify appropriate conceptual model(s) for the EQ VAS from Part 1, we used Jylha’s measurement model for self-rated health and Wilson and Cleary’s model for HRQoL to frame the empirical analysis of Part 2. Empirical data analysis was conducted using the Health Survey for England (HSE: annual survey randomly sampling private households in England) 2017 and 2018. All respondents ≥18 years who completed the EQ VAS were eligible for analyses. Ordinary least squares regressions and partial least squares structure equation modelling (PLS-SEM) were used to investigate how a large set of variables related to the EQ VAS. Relevant predictor variables were classified into blocks: physiological indicators, medication use, functional limitations, presence of illness, symptoms (2017 data only), health behaviors and socio-economic/demographic factors. Regressions were assessed for each block to understand the predictive value of the items within the blocks. Items were excluded from the models if p-values were >0.1. Items with p-values between 0.1 and 0.05 were assessed for further inclusion in models using the F-test. Then, sociodemographic and socioeconomic items were added to each of the first five blocks using stepwise forward inclusion. Results: Part 1: We found appropriate framework for using the EQ VAS for valuing hypothetical health states rather than an overall measure of one’s own health. The specific layout of the EQ VAS reflects its valuation origin, such as drawing a line (the previous version), vertical orientation, and choice of end labels. None of these design elements were selected for the purpose of measuring self-reported overall health. The issue around end labels is particularly a concern. Part 2: More than 7000 respondents ≥18 years old completed the EQ VAS data in each year of the HSE. The EQ-5D-5L items accounted for the largest percent of variance in the EQ VAS (r-squared= 0.47, 0.48). Excluding pain, limitations in function due to specific health conditions was the next strongest explanatory block (r-squared=0.32) followed by presence of illnesses (r-squared= 0.22) and health behaviors (r-squared=0.15). Medication use, sociodemographic/- economic and physiological indicator blocks explained ≤10% of the variation in the EQ VAS. Within blocks, specific variables related to vision, skin and digestive problems were consistently not important in regression models whereas the largest decrements in EQ VAS were found for variables related to mobility/musculoskeletal conditions, nervous system conditions, and infectious diseases. Adding SES to the health behavior, functional limitation and presence of illness blocks yielded marginal improvement to explained variance of EQ VAS. The data demonstrated good fit to the Wilson & Cleary model using SEM: proximal concepts along the main pathway were shown to explain more variance in EQ-VAS and SRH than distal concepts and those not along the main pathway. To a less extend some level of evidence supported the Jylhä model too. However, we did not have the necessary measures in the HSE to find strong support for this model. Conclusions: There is a dearth of literature addressing the conceptual framework of EQ VAS as a measure of self-rated overall health. Despite this limitation, the measure remained a component of the EQ-5D instrument across all versions, demonstrating it is adding value that both the EQ-5D developers and end users continue to exploit. Although we initially were guided by Jylhä’s conceptual model to inform the analysis of EQ VAS, the results more closely resembled Wilson & Cleary’s causal model of health-related quality of life. To our knowledge, our study was the first empirical application of theoretical models of self-rated health and HRQoL to the EQ VAS. Consistency was found between models for EQ VAS and a single item SRH, although most models were stronger for SRH.
