Background: Time trade-off (TTO) is a class of methods designed to elicit preference values for health states on a scale appropriate for use in quality-adjusted life year (QALY) calculations. TTO variants are the primary preference elicitation methods used valuation studies for the EQ-5D-3L and EQ-5D-5L health-related quality of life instruments. A common, and unfortunate, characteristic of TTO-based values is a disproportionate difference between full health (conventionally set to 1) and the mildest health states describable in e.g. the EQ-5D, compared to similar decrements added to imperfect health states. A disproportionate initial drop could lead to overspending on interventions targeting relatively trivial health problems. This study was designed to investigate whether the observed drop from full health is specific to full health, or better reflects a general tendency to contrast the presented health states, i.e. a form of end point aversion induced by the TTO format. Methods: 120 general population respondents were administered lead-time TTO for a fixed set of EQ-5D-5L health states (12111, 11122, 12122, 13224, and 24445), each traded off against 11111 and all dominating states, for a total of 14 comparisons presented in random order. For all triplets of states in logical dominance order (A, B, and C), we compared four statistical models for expressing the value of C in terms of A vs. through B: 1) no end aversion, u(C, A) = u(C, B)*u(B, A) End aversion for full health only, u(C, A) +α = u(C, B)*(u(B, A)+α), 3) End aversion in all TTO values, u(C, A) +α = (u(C, B) +α)*(u(B, A)+α), and 4) Proportional end-aversion u(C, A) *(1+α) = u(C, B) *(1+α)*u(B, A)*(1+α). Results: The worst performing model was the one assuming no end-aversion (1), and the best was model, assuming end aversion for all comparisons. Conclusions: The findings indicate that TTO values tend to be distanced from the top, which could reflect a contrasting effect. If this is observed in TTO-based valuation studies, the result would be a downward bias for all imperfect health states, suggesting that it may be appropriate to rescale TTO values, e.g. by removing the intercept.
