Background: Data from EQ instruments are widely collected in routine care settings. Despite the recognized importance of this type of patient-reported outcome data, its use remains limited. Effective visualization of EQ-5D data is essential for enhancing their interpretation and ultimately promoting their uptake and use in health systems.  Aims: While previous studies have focused on EQ-5D data presentation and visualization for clinical end-users, this study aims to identify effective visualization formats of routinely collected EQ-5D data for health system administrators and decision-makers through a two-part approach: (1) conducting a scoping review to identify current visualization formats for routinely collected EQ-5D data in any clinical setting, and (2) using the visualization formats identified from the review to explore Canadian health system stakeholders’ preferences for visualizing routinely collected EQ-5D data in hip and knee arthroplasty, as part of the Canadian National PROM program. Methods: The scoping review (part 1) will summarize literature related to the graphical display of EQ-5D data collected in routine care. Searches will be performed across multiple databases and grey literature sources, complemented by information from the EuroQol office regarding registered projects on routine EQ instrument collection. The most common visualization formats identified from the review will be used to create samples for part 2 of the study. For the second part, national and provincial health system stakeholders (e.g., PROM program leads, administrators) from five Canadian provinces participating in the national PROM program will be interviewed about their preferences for EQ-5D data visualization. The interviews will be analyzed using directed content analysis, based on pre-determined themes including ease of interpretation, usefulness of the content, and visual appeal.  Benefit of the research: Understanding stakeholders’ preferences for presenting EQ-5D data in hip and knee arthroplasty will help improve data visualization, ultimately promoting the routine collection and use of EQ-5D data in health systems.
