PhD candidate Ava Hoogenboom (EuroQol PhD network member) visited Kim Dalziel and the Health Economics Research group at the Melbourne School of Population and Global Health of the University of Melbourne for two weeks in October and November 2024. Ava works on project 1462-PHD aimed at examining the desirability, feasibility, and impact of involving children in the valuation of EQ-5D-Y health states. The project provides insight into the theoretical/normative and empirical underpinning of involving children in decisions on health and healthcare and into the various ways in which children can (potentially) be involved. This visit to Melbourne has yielded several results. Firstly, Ava expanded her knowledge on child health state valuation (HSV) by learning first-hand from researchers in Melbourne who are currently working on child HSV (e.g., the QUOKKA research project). For example, Ava met with Kim Dalziel and several of her PhD students on multiple occasions, exchanging knowledge and research experiences and brainstorming about how children could be involved in HSV. More specifically, it was explored what kind of tasks (TTO and others) children would be able to complete. In addition, Ava attended several presentations related to health technology assessment, and visited the children's hospital to learn more about how healthcare workers include children in decisions and policy making regarding child health and how the hospital implements local and national policies regarding children's involvement. This visit gave Ava the opportunity to exchange expectations and ideas on how to involve children, by learning from experts how they involve children in their own care and in research related to child health. For example, it was discussed how researchers should tailor their work to the needs and desires of children. After this visit, it was agreed that Ava and the researchers at the children’s hospital would stay in touch to continue to exchange knowledge on the topic. Secondly, the visit provided the occasion and possibility to further elaborate on the contents and designs of the remaining work packages in Ava's PhD project. Meetings with other researchers from Australia and also from Sweden emphasized that lessons can be learned from researchers and healthcare professionals that specialize in involving children in a broader sense, rather than focused on health state valuation. As a result, Ava and her supervisor Vivian Reckers-Droog explored options to expand the scope of some studies in the PhD project. That is, a planning for the remainder of Ava’s PhD trajectory was made that allows Ava to take a broader approach on the involvement of children in HSV by also considering methods used to involve children in their own care or in policy assessments. Thirdly, an additional (unplanned) visit to the Health Economics Group at Monash University took place, during which Ava spoke with multiple researchers (both PhD candidates and more senior staff). During this visit, Ava also attended presentations and got a chance to meet EuroQol (PhD network) members. Fourthly, during her visit to Melbourne, Ava strengthened and broadened her network (both with non-members and members of EuroQol) by meeting researchers from Australia, as well as other visiting researchers from the US and Sweden. This might result in future collaborations, especially with a group of researchers that focuses on involving children in policy making in a clinical setting.
