Background: Preferences for child health states can be derived from adults, adolescents, or a combination of these age groups. The Ethiopian Federal Ministry of Health and Ethiopian Public Health Institute has expressed an interest in developing a value set for the EQ-5D-Y-5L. However, there is no currently established protocol for involving adolescents in EQ-5D-Y valuation tasks. Evidence on whether adolescents can successfully complete DCE with duration or TTO tasks is lacking, and it has yet to be determined which valuation tasks (DCE, TTO, or DCE with duration) should be used in the EQ-5D-Y-5L valuation protocol. Aims: The objective of this study is to explore the perceptions and experiences of adults and adolescents with the valuation tasks (DCE, TTO, or DCE with duration) being considered for the EQ-5D-Y-5L valuation protocol in Ethiopia. Methods: This study will be conducted using a qualitative descriptive study design. A purposive sample of adults (≥ 18 years) and adolescents (12-17 yeas) will be recruited from the Ethiopian general population. Participants will be asked through face to face interview using EQ-VT to complete a series of DCE tasks followed by DCE with duration, and TTO based on EQ-5D-Y-3L valuation protocol. As they go through the valuation tasks, they will be instructed to verbalize their thought process following a think-aloud approach. After completion of the valuation tasks, the participant will participate in a semi-structured individual interview to gain a deeper understanding of their perceptions and understanding of these tasks. Participants will be stratified into age bands to explore age-related differences in completing valuation tasks using predefined indicators. Abraham Welie will conduct the interviews with male participants, while a pediatrician female researcher will conduct the interviews with female participants. The interviews will be audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. The data will be analyzed using content analysis. Findings from the think-aloud and semi-structured interviews will then be combined using a narrative synthesis.
