Background:The EuroQol group has observed several problematicissues related to the quality of valuation data collected using the EQ-VT system. The objective of this study was to test if reintroducing a ranking task prior to TTO valuation could help to reduce inconsistencies and improve the quality of thedata in future valuation studies.Method:The study was performed in Spain (Canary Island). Respondents were assigned to three different study arms. Thecontrol group (Arm 1) wasthe current EQ-VT version, which did not include a ranking task. The second arm (Arm 2)wasthe EQ-VT preceded by a ranking task similar to the one used in the MVH protocol, in which the respondents wereasked to rank the target health states using physical cards. The last arm (Arm 3)wassimilar to the second, with ranking prior to the EQ-VT. Unlike the second branch, the ranked states remainedvisible through the Composite TTO (C-TTO) tasks, and the C-TTO states order weredetermined by the rank order. We usedjust one specific block of 10 C-TTO states. A total sample size of 600(~200 per experimental arm) respondentswererandomly selected with representatives in term of age and gender ofCanary Islands population. All interviews wereperformed face to face. The interviewers performed similar number of interviews in the different experimental branches. We comparedthe number of C-TTO-based inconsistencies.Results:The final sample size was 600 respondents (196, 205 and 199 for arms 1, 2 and 3 respectively). The percentages of times when the state 55555 was not valued as the worst state on C-TTO responses by study arm were 13.27%, 10.73% and 13.57% for arms 1, 2, 3 respectively. However, none of the observed differences in levels of inconsistent responses were statistically significant.Conclusions:Under the light of theseresults it does not make sense to increment the current burden of EQ-VT by adding the ranking task as it does not improve the data quality neither the spikes on C-TTO observed values distributions.
