The data collected for this project was used for 2 analyses: 1) to examine how the routine use of PROMs (including the EQ-5D-5L) influences patient-clinician communication in in-centre hemodialysis units in Northern Alberta and; 2) to describe the burden of depressive and anxiety symptoms reported by adults on in-centre hemodialysis in Northern Alberta, using PROMs, and understand patients’ and nurses’ perceptions of managing such symptoms. Both analyses employed a concurrent, longitudinal, mixed-methods research design. The quantitative data came from a multi-centre cluster randomized controlled trial (a separately funded study) of 17 hemodialysis units in northern Alberta that introduced a PROMs intervention. Patient-clinician communication was assessed using a modified Communication Assessment Tool (CAT). Depressive and anxiety symptoms were assessed using the Patient Health Questionnaire - 2 item (PHQ-2) and Generalized Anxiety Disorder - 2 item (GAD-2), respectively. Using purposeful sampling, patients and nurses were invited for interviews. Field notes were documented from dialysis unit observations. Patients’ responses to open-ended survey questions and nurses’ electronic chart notes related to mental health were compiled. Thematic and content analyses were used. For analysis 1, PROM use did not substantively improve patient-clinician communication. There was a small positive change in mean total CAT scores (range 1-5) from baseline to 12-months in PROM use units (0.25) but little difference from control group units that did not use PROMs (0.21). The qualitative findings provide in-depth insights into why PROM use did not improve patient-clinician communication; the purpose of PROM use was not always understood by patients and clinicians; PROMs were not implemented as originally intended in the trial, despite clinician training; PROM completion was seen to challenge communication; and PROM use was perceived to have limited value. For analysis 2, 29% screened positive for depressive symptoms, 21% for anxiety symptoms, and 16% for both. From patient (n = 10) and nurse (n = 8) interviews, unit observations (n=6), patient survey responses (n = 779) and nurses’ chart notes (n = 84), we discerned that PROMs (ESAS-r: Renal/EQ-5D-5L) had the potential to identify and prompt management of mental health concerns. However, opinions differed about whether mental health was within kidney care scope. Nonetheless, participants agreed there was a lack of mental health resources.
