In the design, delivery, and dissemination of health research, collaboratively engaging with individuals invested in or affected by the research – beyond researchers themselves – is considered best practice. While collaborative engagement is common in many areas of health, the degree to which it is undertaken in health state valuation is unclear. The aim of this research was to: (i) identify best practice recommendations for collaborative engagement in the health economics and related patient-reported outcome (PRO) literature; (ii) identify valuation studies that featured examples of collaborative engagement; and (iii) map (ii) onto (i) to identify the degree of alignment between the two, to inform future practice and recommendations. A scoping review was conducted following best practice guidance, featuring database and grey literature searching. For aim (i), manuscripts or reports featuring at least one best practice recommendation for collaborative engagement were identified; recommendations were extracted and thematically synthesised. For aim (ii), health state valuation manuscripts published since 2019 featuring collaborative engagement were identified and key details extracted, before being mapped against synthesised recommendations (aim (iii)). Twenty-one papers featuring recommendations were included and fifteen best practice recommendations for collaborative engagement synthesised. Fifteen papers featuring examples of collaborative engagement in health state valuation were included. Most examples involved engaging patients and/or experts when informing health states. There was no evidence that 11 out of 15 synthesised recommendations had been applied in the valuation studies, with only nominal evidence provided for the remaining four. In conclusion, collaborative engagement in health state valuation appears misaligned with emerging recommendations from the health economics and PRO literature. The recommendations synthesised in this review represent a strategic starting point for developing guidance to improve practice.
