The responsiveness of the EQ-5D-3L to patient-level changes over time in respiratory diseases likeasthma and COPD appears limited.Therefore we exploredthe potential of adding a respiratory dimension to the current EQ-5D descriptive system, i.e. a bolt-on dimension.Aim of the study was to develop a respiratory bolt-on for the EQ-5D-5L and assess the impact of the developed respiratory bolt-on on EQ-5D-5L health state valuations and the explanatory power of the EQ-5D-5L. The first part of the study, described in this report, aimedto explore the impact of different respiratory items on the explanation of the EQ-5D VAS scores and to develop a respiratory bolt-on for the EQ-5D-5L. To identify which of the respiratory complaints of asthma and COPD patients was the most promising candidate for a bolt-on three different routes were followed. Firstly, a content review of the EQ-5D and six disease-specific health-related quality of life measures for asthma and COPD was performed. Disease-specific questionnaires included in this content review were the asthma quality of life questionnaire (AQLQ), the asthma control questionnaire (ACQ), the St. Georges Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ), the COPD Assessment Test (CAT), the Clinical COPD Questionnaire (CCQ), and the mMRC dyspnea scale. Secondly, a post-hoc analysis of data from three clinical studies in which both EQ-5D and disease-specific quality of life were measured was done. Multivariate regression analyses were performed to investigate how much the proportion of variance in EQ-5D VAS scores that is explained (i.e. the R2) increased when we added respiratory items of the different disease-specific questionnaires tothe EQ-5D dimension scores. Thirdly, a principal component analysis was performed for the disease-specific health-related quality of life questionnaires in combination with the EQ-5D to investigate which items from the questionnaires form different constructs apart from the EQ 5D domains.Results for the content review showed that all disease-specific questionnaires include questions about the impact of asthma/breathlessness on physical activities. The EQ-5D includes a question about the impact on physicalactivities in terms of the impact on mobility. Five of the disease-specific questionnaires address asthma or COPD-specific symptoms, while the EQ-5D addresses symptoms more broadly in terms of pain/discomfort. Impact on functioning was included in four disease-specific questionnaires as well as the EQ-5D. Domains that were included in several disease-specific questionnaires, but not in the EQ-5D, were impact on sleep and use of medication. The post-hoc regression analyses showed that in four out of five questionnaires, the ACQ, AQLQ, CCQ and MRC, questions about the impact of asthma/shortness of breath on physical activities were found to explain the highest additional R2. For the SGRQ items about the problems the chest condition causes had the highest additional R2. Results of the PCA showed that for multiple questionnaires separate constructs were found on which none of the EQ-5D items loaded. These constructs either related to symptoms or impact of breathlessness on activities. Based on the combined results of the post-hoc regression analyses and the PCA we concluded that symptoms and the impact of shortness of breath on physical activities were the two most appropriate items/domains for inclusion in the respiratory bolt-on.Several possible formulations of the new respiratory bolt-onwere tested for clarity, comprehensiveness and relevance in five asthma patients, six COPD patientsand five non-patients. Based on these interviews we concluded that patients and non-patients considered a question on the impact of shortness of breath on their ability to do physical activities highly relevant and important. However, they think that the added value to the existing questions of the EQ-5D is limited. A question about symptoms is regarded of less importance, but is considered to have no overlap with the existing questions of the EQ-5D. Based on these findings we decided to include both candidate respiratory bolt-ons in the valuation study to see which of the two has the most impact on the valuation.
