Introduction When constructing an EQ-5D value set, a small number of health states will be directly valued by general public, and subsequently values for all health states are predicted using a regression model. A criterion that has been used for selecting health states for direct valuation, is whether the health states are ‘implausible’ for respondents. Health states being ‘implausible’ refers to those health states that respondent might find unrealistic. Inclusion of implausible states has been assumed to compromise respondents’ engagement with the task and to increase uncertainty around obtained health states’ values. Nevertheless, ‘implausible health states’ can be found in almost all valuation studies. In this study, we first, rated the ‘implausibility’ of all 3,125EQ-5D-5L health states using a student panel and explored the impact of ‘implausibility’ on data modelling; second, we explored the thought process of the respondents used to value ‘implausible’ health states. Methods1,600 students from Guizhou Medical University China, were recruited and each student valued around 200 EQ-5D-5L health states using EQ-VAS. Of those, 890 students provided feedback on the implausibility of health states they valued using a binary scale (implausible/plausible). In addition, 9 students were invited to share their views on ‘implausible health states’ in one on one semi-structured interviews and 12 students were invited in two focus group discussion (6 students each). An ‘implausibility’ score (ranging from 0 to 1, indicating the proportion of respondents who rated a health state as ‘implausible’; a higher score meaning more implausible) was calculated for each health state. Four OLS main effect model were fitted using implausible/plausible/all observations with/without additional implausible variable. Goodness of fit and misprediction effect were compared between models. Thematic analysis was performed for qualitative data by two independent researchers. ResultsApproximately 30% of the 3,125 EQ-5D-5L health states were rated as‘implausible’ by at least 50% of respondents. In the 20 dummy variables main effect model for estimating value set, adding the ‘implausibility’ information in the model as an addictive variable improved the model fit and lowered the MSE with a beta=-3.231(P=0.000) with 95% CI: -4.430, -2.032 (on EQ-VAS). Besides, excluding the implausible observations from the model will result in higher prediction error (MAE from 3.088 to 3.444). The qualitative work showed that some respondents encountered problems whenvaluing ‘implausible health states’. The most frequently reported categories of ‘implausible health states’ was: ‘health states with contradicting levels between dimensions’. The major reason for difficulty in valuing health states reported was ‘lack of experience/knowledge with severe health problems’. Respondents tended to give low value to ‘implausible health state’. Strategies respondents used to value ‘implausible’ state include ‘rewrite the health state to rationalize the contradictions’, ‘focus on certain dimensions and value’ and ‘refer to previous valued health states’.Discussions Our findings suggested that within the EQ-5D-5L set of 3,125 health states ‘implausible health states’ were not rare and respondents tended give low value to ‘implausible health states’. The understanding of ‘implausible health states’ differed over respondents. Nevertheless, inclusion of those implausible health states improves the model to estimated values sets. In cTTO task, the effect of the ‘implausible health state’ may not be problematic as respondent reactions can be controlled by the interviewer. In on-line DCE studies however, without further assistance from interviewers, the inclusion of implausible health state may irritate, confuse respondent and leads to more randomness in the data.ConclusionImplausible health states do exists, are more difficult to value and tent to have lower values, but excluding such state from modelling will result in higher prediction error in overall. Hence, it is not recommended to remove such states from a valuation study.
