The Toddler and Infant (TANDI) HRQoL measure for use in children aged 0-3 years is designed for completion by proxy and was developed in English in South Africa. It was based on the EuroQol model of health status and aimed to be part of the EuroQol family of instruments to allow measurement and valuation of health across the lifespan. The TANDI was developed following a rigorous process which included the generation and refinement of the item pool through review of the literature (EQ Project 2014_200), cognitive interviews with caregivers of children, a round table meeting with paediatric experts (EQ Project 2016_180) and two rounds of an online Delphi panel with international experts in paediatric health and HRQoL (14). A preliminary set of 11 items (dimensions) were quantitatively tested in children with and without illness and reduced, according to a priori criteria to six dimensions and a Visual Analogue scale measuring general health (15). The final version of the TANDI includes six dimensions: movement, play, pain, relationships, communication and eating, with (currently) three levels of severity in each (Appendix B). The measure has retained the EQ-VAS (15). Content validity and psychometric properties of the TANDI have only been tested in South Africa with good results. Concurrent validity of dimensions showed moderate to strong correlations to instruments measuring similar constructs. Internal consistency reliability was good (α= 0.83). The TANDI was able to discriminate between known groups (children with acute illness, chronic illness and those from the general population). Test-retest results showed no variance for dimension scores of movement and play, and high agreement for pain (83%), relationships (87%), communication (83%) and eating (74%) and the VAS scores were highly correlated (ICC = 0.76; p < 0.001). Intellectual property (IP) of the TANDI has been transferred to the EuroQol Research Foundation and it is currently classified as an experimental version.
