EuroQol instruments are often used to compare health (gains) across groups defined by disease, demographic, socioeconomic, and other characteristics. Systematic differences in the way in which groups respond to the instruments – reporting heterogeneity (RH) – bias comparisons. For example, socioeconomic health inequality will be underestimated if lower socioeconomic groups report health more positively. Such differences in reporting styles may, in part, arise from differences in health knowledge and beliefs.  RH is potentially present in EQ-5D descriptions of health levels within dimensions, in EQ VAS global assessments of health, and in EQ-5D value sets representing preferences between levels and across dimensions. To identify and correct RH in these EuroQol instruments, some external anchor is required. For example, a respondent’s evaluation of the health of a vignette description of functioning within a health domain identifies RH, which can then be purged from the respondent’s evaluation of their own health, using the same instrument. This method relies on the assumptions of vignette equivalence (VE) – all respondents interpret a vignette in the same way – and response consistency (RC) – a respondent uses the same style to report own health and that of the vignettes. There is limited and mixed evidence on the validity of these assumptions, particularly in the context of EuroQol instruments.  This PhD project will test for RH in data obtained with EuroQol instruments and it aims to develop methods to purge these instruments of RH. In collaboration with the research team, the student will review vignettes that have been developed for use with the EQ-5D descriptive system, with a view to developing new vignettes for which the identification assumptions (VE and RC) are more plausible (WP1). Next, we will develop and test methods that use vignettes data to identify and correct RH in categorical ratings of health obtained with EQ-5D (WP2). The project will also evaluate the use of vignettes to purge RH from EQ VAS scores (WP3). In addition to identifying RH and correcting for it in data obtained with EuroQol instruments, the project will explore sources of RH. In particular, we aim to test the hypothesis that it arises, in part, from differences in health knowledge and beliefs (WP4, WP5). Evaluation of a health state may be contingent on ability to recognize its risks and on beliefs about the relative position of that state. Finally, we will apply the methods developed in WP1-WP5 to purge RH from estimates of socioeconomic health inequality obtained with EuroQol instruments (WP6).
