The current project is pioneering comparatively analysing the psychometric performance of EQ-5D-Y-3L and -5L and Kidscreen (KS-27 and KS-10) and Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) in Youngs in the most prevalent mental and behavioral disorder in Youngs: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) that affects the social, educational and work performance. A previous study of QUOKKA Group (O'Loughlin et al., 2024) have compared EQ-5D-Y instruments to other questionnaires commonly used in clinical and economical setting such as CHU9D or PED-QL, while the current project complemented this pre-cited study comparing KSs and SDQ that are used in clinical and educational environment.Sample. The main purposes were to comparatively analyse the performance of EQ-5D-Ys in a sample of Youngs (8 to 17 years old, n=115) with ADHD and we compared also the discriminatory capability of EQ-5D-Ys to a General Young Population Group (n=150). The parents were also asked to self-report the proxy versions of the questionnaires.Administration. This cross-sectional project used a face-to-face supervising -no interview- methodology to administer the self-reported set of questionnaires in Youngs with ADHD (sociodemographics and health survey, EQ-5D-Y-3L and -5L, VAS, SDQ and KS-27) to assure they complete the questionnaires and the proxies to their parents who gave the informed consent. In addition, 30 participants filled the EQ-5D-Ys versions in a 7-day test-retest interstice to analyze the reproducibility. The General Population completed their responses of EQ-5D-Ys by self-report in a supervised session in the school.Analysis. The study assessed the feasibility and reliability, convergent validity by Spearman correlations, discriminative validity by known groups comparisons analysed by ANOVAs and Spearman correlations, redistribution of -5Levels responses onto -3L displayed by heatmaps and reliability in this population.Main results and conclusions. The EQ-5D-Y-3L and -5L are feasible and have shown their convergent validity with KS-10 and SDQ items and subscales adding an unexpected result: both questionnaires significantly distinguished between normal and abnormal hyperactivity scale and the scores of EQ-5D-Ys linearly correlated with the strengths and difficulties scores and hyperactivity scale. This support further studies to develop the potential to clinically and educational assessment and screening in Youngs with ADHD with EQ-5D-Ys. Nevertheless, the EQ-5D-Y-5L is recommended over -3L version because it presented better discrimination between the known-groups General Population and Youngs with ADHD and the floor, ceiling and redistribution of -5L onto -3L in intermediate levels in the dimensions of daily living activities, pain/discomfort, and worries/sad/unhappy are quite diffuse in this population.
