The EQ-HWB-S has been included in an innovative new study from University of Sydney, which aims to optimise the functional and social independence and safety of older people living with dementia in aged care homes, titled: Implementation Research of Interdisciplinary Care Home-bAsed Reablement Program (I-CHARP). This NHMRC funded program aims to implement an intervention previously developed for home-based care (Interdisciplinary Home-bAsed Reablement Program (I-HARP)). The I-HARP intervention was a community-based rehabilitation program for people with mild-to-moderate cognitive decline, living at home. The study found a significant impact for people living with mild dementia specifically for better functional independence in the intervention group(1). I-CHARP builds on I-HARP to transfer the program logic from home-based care to residential aged care settings. The intervention includes 8-12 full individual sessions and eight brief follow-ups per resident, tailored to their needs, and delivered by a team of occupational therapists, registered nurses, and allied health staff. The I-CHARP program is a bio-behavioural-environmental intervention that includes a comprehensive assessment of the person and the environment, minor environmental modifications and assistive devices/technologies/communication aids, training in use of compensatory strategies, medication review and adherence support, strength and balance training and exercise, activity engagement, problem solving for depression intervention, pain management, cognitive rehabilitation, communication rehabilitation/communication partner training, nutrition management, carer support (family and care staff), alongside consultation/referrals as necessary for physiotherapist, psychologist, dietitian, speech pathologist, GP, and other specialist appointments. Data collection is currently underway. The study will contain 188 participants at baseline (already collected), an estimated 150 participants at 4-6 months follow-up (completed by April 2025), and 120 participants at 12-months follow-up (completed by the end of 2025). The longitudinal nature of this study and the relevant population of people living with dementia with mild cognitive decline, makes this study invaluable for determining the validity of the EQ-HWB-S in this hard-to-reach population. There are three quality-of-life instruments included (Quality of Life in Alzheimer’s Disease (QoL-AD) for overall quality of life (mapped to the AD-5D(2)), the EQ-5D-5L, and the EQ Health and Wellbeing instrument for health and wellbeing related quality of life (EQ-HWB-S), making this study ideal for measuring convergent validity. A wide range of dementia specific instruments have been included making this study ideal for measuring known-groups validity. The longitudinal nature of the study makes this ideal for measuring the responsiveness of the EQ-HWB-S to change. The EQ-HWB-S was included in this study as an instrument that is potentially responsive to change in QoL over time and between groups in this population. A pilot value-set from the UK is now available (3) for the EQ-HWB-S, valued on the zero to one scale necessary to calculate Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs). As data collection for this study is not yet completed, we will also be able to include different versions of the EQ-HWB-S within the study design, enabling testing of potential changes to the EQ-HWB-S that are currently being considered. We will work with the EQ-HWB-S working group regarding the versions of the EQ-HWB-S to be included in the final data collection rounds. This data presents an opportunity to investigate the validity and, most importantly, the responsiveness to change, of the EQ-HWB-S in a population of people living with dementia with low cognitive decline. Baseline and follow-up data will be available, and it is anticipated that the intervention will improve participants’ quality-of-life over time. Aims The aim of the research for which funds are requested in this grant application is to measure the validity and responsiveness to change of the EQ-HWB-S in data from a trial to evaluate the effects of specific program for people living with dementia with mild cognitive decline. Specifically, we aim to: 1. Validate the scale in this population using: a. Feasibility and response distribution, b. Convergent validity analysis against a range of relevant self-complete scales c. Known groups validity analysis across a range of known groups 2. Determine if the instrument is responsive to change over time (between baseline and post intervention, 4-6 months and 12 months) 3. Investigate differences between versions of the EQ-HWB-S following the EQ-HWB Working Group guidelines. Method Data will be collected as part of the NHMRC funded I-CHARP study. Data collection for this innovative study is staggered over three cycles, with each cycle taking 12 months, and including data at baseline, follow up at 4-6 months, and final data collection at 12 months. We expect approximately a 20% attrition at each collection of the follow up data.. 65% of the data will use the modified version of the EQ-HWB-S, and 35% will use the original version. Data collection will be completed at the end of 2025 for all cycles; however, to provide timely results to EuroQol we anticipate writing an interim report on the data that has completed collection by April 2025. We also note that any reference to outcomes of the intervention cannot be published until after the I-CHARP study main results have been published. This will not stop us from writing the report for EuroQol but will mean that we hold off publishing the responsiveness data if we include the intervention in this analysis. Baseline survey will include: Socio-demographic data: (Age, Sex, Ethnicity, Education), Dementia diagnosis information including: Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination (ACE-III)(49) for cognitive status; Clinical information (health and cognitive conditions, medications, GP and specialist consults; Global Deterioration Rating Scale for Assessment of Primary Degenerative Dementia (GDRS) for dementia severity; Disability Assessment for Dementia (DAD) to assess daily function and self-care ability; Primary outcome, Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB)(50) for objective physical function. There will be three quality-of-life instruments included, which can be use for convergent validity analysis: Quality of Life in Alzheimer’s Disease (QoL-AD) for overall quality of life, mapped to the AQ-5D(2), EQ-5D-5L, EQ Health and Wellbeing instrument (EQ-HWB-S). Statistical Analysis Using the baseline data, the EQ-HWB-S items will be assessed in terms of feasibility (missing data), response distribution (across items), convergent validity (using Spearman’s correlations comparing the EQ-HWB-S to the AQ-5D and the EQ-5D) and known groups validity (across pre-hypothesised groups using t-tests and one-way ANOVAs). Using the longitudinal data, we will analyse responsiveness to change as per our previous study(4) where changes in dementia status will be compared to changes in health and wellbeing (EQ-HWB-S). We will conduct an evaluation of the potential differences between the two versions of the EQ-HWB-S using the Working Group guidelines: “Guidance for Testing EQ-HWB Modifications”.
