Imagine being able to triage cancer patients with emotional distress (ED) based on one simple question, allowing them to timely get the psychosocial care they need. Emotional distress (ED) is the mental or emotional suffering during the diagnosis and treatment of cancer, often presenting as anxiety, depression, or hopelessness. ED requires timely intervention, as it is associated with poorer health-related quality of life (HRQoL), outcomes, and even survival in patients with advanced-stage melanoma (stage III or IV). Clinical guidelines therefore recommend routine screening for depression, anxiety, and insomnia in cancer patients to facilitate timely referral to psychosocial care. Patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) are validated questionnaires completed by patients that could be valuable tools for routine screening of ED. However, PROMs are currently not used for this purpose in clinical practice. Despite a recent successful pilot for PROMs-based ED screening in patients with advanced melanoma at the Netherlands Cancer Institute (NKI), its practicality has not yet been demonstrated. Importantly, this pilot was based on the EORTC QLQ-C30, while the EQ-5D-5L is a potentially more attractive PROM given its brevity. Yet, the EQ-5D-5L is currently not fit for clinical practice use, as healthcare professionals cannot interpret its scores without thresholds for determining clinically relevant ED. This project will lay the groundwork for implementing the EQ-5D-5L in routine clinical cancer care as a PROMs-based screening tool for ED in patients with advanced melanoma. The primary objective is to establish a clinically meaningful threshold for the EQ-5D-5L that enables the interpretation of ED, allowing it to replace the EORTC QLQ-C30 in PROMs-based ED screening. To secure the future implementation and use of the EQ-5D-5L in clinical practice, the secondary aim is to demonstrate the practicality of PROMs-based ED screening in routine clinical practice of advanced melanoma care.In the first work package (WP), we will implement the successfully piloted PROMs-based screening approach for ED in routine clinical care for advanced melanoma patients at the NKI. This screening builds on existing PROMs already in use at the NKI, including the EQ-5D-5L and the EORTC QLQ-C30, which are completed by melanoma patients every three months during diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up. A research assistant will collect and interpret patients’ EORTC QLQ-C30 scores at diagnosis and three months post-diagnosis, using its validated clinical threshold values for ED that serve as the golden standard. Patients scoring below this threshold will be invited to complete more detailed assessments of anxiety, depression, and insomnia, providing a deeper understanding of the severity and nature of their ED. All patients who complete these in-depth assessments will be asked to share their views on the ED screening in a short debriefing interview with the research assistant. Patients are fed back their assessment results by the research assistant and offered referrals to appropriate supportive care services (e.g., social work, psychology, or psychiatry) depending on symptom severity. In the second WP, a PhD student will analyze the extensive data collected in the first WP. EQ-5-5L scores are analyzed in comparison to the EORTC QLQ-C30 to determine the most optimal threshold to detect clinically relevant ED for the EQ-5D-5L using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses. The Youden’s J statistic (sensitivity + specificity − 1) will be used to identify the single cut-point maximizing correct classification. The added value of the developed threshold added to the EORTC QLQ-C30 or as standalone alternative will be determined through logistic regression models predicting the presence of ED by the EORTC QLQ-C30, EQ-5D-5L, or EORTC QLQ-C30 + EQ-5D-5L combined. To assess the value of the in-depth assessments, associations between ED and anxiety, depression, insomnia, and other domains of the EQ-5D and EORTC QLQ-C30 are as well analyzed in the logistic regression models. To demonstrate the practicality of PROMs based-screening for ED and use of supportive care resulting from PROMs-based ED screening, we will describe the demographic and clinical characteristics of patients that take part in each step of the ED screening, illustrating the potential impact on supportive care capacity for hospitals implementing PROMs-based ED screening in the future.This proposal directly addresses the PHSWG’s call for “research that explores the implementation of EuroQol instruments in routine outcome measurement.” As survival in advanced melanoma improves, care must increasingly focus on patients’ HRQoL. By developing clinically meaningful thresholds for interpreting ED using the EQ-5D-5L, this project will enable patient-centered care and embed the EQ-5D-5L into routine clinical practice. With steeply increasing melanoma incidence, this work will expand the reach and impact of the EuroQol Group’s measures across a growing patient population.
