Background: Generic preference-based instruments like the EQ-5D-5L are widely used to assess health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in both patient and general populations. However, its five core dimensions may not fully capture aspects of health that the general public considers important, such as energy and fatigue. To address this limitation, bolt-on dimensions have been proposed to enhance the EQ-5D-5L's relevance in population health surveys. EuroQol is planning to launch the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox as an instrument to accompany the EQ-5D-5L. Fatigue/energy and sleep are candidate bolt-ons for the Toolbox. For fatigue/energy, multiple different wordings have been proposed, and psychometric evidence is needed to support item development, refining and selection. Objectives: The aim of this study is to address gaps in evidence regarding the psychometric performance of five energy- and sleep-related EQ-5D-5L bolt-ons: tiredness, energy, fatigue, exhaustion, and sleep. Our main research questions are:  What are the comparative psychometric properties of the five energy- and sleep-related EQ-5D-5L bolt-ons: tiredness, energy, fatigue, exhaustion, and sleep in the adult general population? How do the five energy- and sleep-related EQ-5D-5L bolt-ons relate to each other and to widely used symptom-specific measures, such as the FACIT-Fatigue Scale and Rash-Transformed Fatigue Severity Scale (RT-FSS) in the adult general population? Do the five energy- and sleep-related EQ-5D-5L bolt-ons (tiredness, energy, fatigue, exhaustion, and sleep) demonstrate measurement invariance across the English, Spanish, German, Italian, and Japanese language groups? Which of the five energy- and sleep-related EQ-5D-5L bolt-ons is most preferred by the adult general population in terms of relevance of the content, and does the most preferred bolt-on also demonstrate the best psychometric performance?  Methods: We will conduct a secondary analysis of data from the GENESIS study, a multinational longitudinal survey of 10,500 adults representative of the general population in the US (n=3,000), UK, Germany, Italy, Spain, and Japan (n=1,500 each) starting in Q2 2025 (wave 1). A small subset from each country will be recontacted one month later (wave 2). This proposal is related to the analysis of waves 1 and 1 and 2 (~ 1 month after wave 1). Representativeness of the general population will be based on age, gender, region (interlaced), and education/socioeconomic status (overall). Data will be collected on demographics (age, sex, marital status, living situation, education, work situation, height, weight, use of mobility aids, need of a caregiver, chronic health conditions), EQ-5D-5L, bolt-ons, and a set of relevant patient-reported outcome measures including FACIT-Fatigue and Rash-Transformed Fatigue Severity Scale (RT-FSS). Psychometric performance of EQ-5D-5L bolt-ons will be evaluated using distributional characteristics (floor/ceiling effects, profile counts), informativity (Shannon H’ and J’), divergent validity, convergent validity, structural validity, explanatory power, responsiveness, and test-retest reliability. Measurement invariance testing will be conducted to identify differences in the five bolt-ons across languages. In terms of relevance, the most preferred of the five energy- and sleep-related EQ-5D-5L bolt-ons will be identified using average rank scores and the proportion of respondents selecting each bolt-on as the most preferred that reflects the best their HRQoL.
