A key feature of modern approaches to economic appraisal is the treatment of uncertainty, particularly in the context of probabilistic sensitivity analysis used within cost-effectiveness studies (Briggs, Sculpher and Claxton, 2006). However, an underexamined area is variability in health state values and the consequent uncertainty when they are used to estimate QALYs. This project represents the first step toward a wider research programme to address this for values for Euroqol's instruments. The principal methods we used were (a) a scoping review leading to a comprehensive account of sources of variability, from valuation studies, through valuation modelling, to the use of values in specific contexts; and identification of how such variability is currently dealt with as a source of uncertainty in decision analysis modelling. We then (b) created a framework in which the principal sources of variability in EQ-5D values are identified and categorised, drawing on the literature. We discuss the appropriate means by which such variability can be dealt with in the context of uncertainty in valuation studies and in decision analysis modelling. In the course of our work we identified (c) a means of calculating the standard error around values for EQ-5D profiles which has not previously been used. This was demonstrated using data from the MVH 3L valuation study, which we obtained from the ESRC data archives. The MVH modelling sample was replicated, and the covariance matrix produced and used to demonstrate how standard errors can readily be produced for health state profile values. The worked example and tools for producing these standard errors were provided via the LSHTM website: https://www.lshtm.ac.uk/research/centres/global-health-economics-centre/methods-addressing-uncertainty-around-eq-5d-values. Our work has been presented as a paper at the 2023 plenary as an ISPOR Europe 2023 poster. Each element of our work is now being prepared for submission to journals. Finally, our team has additionally produced a memo for the Executive Committee, outlining the future research which could be pursued to strengthen the way uncertainty around HRQoL valuation is handled and reported.
