Background: The 2017 English EQ-5D-5L value set differs substantially from the 1997 UK EQ-5D-3L value set recommended by NICE. Possible reasons include: (a) preferences of people have changed over the last 20 years (b) the composition of the general public has changed, affecting average preferences (c) differences in methods used to elicit preferences; (d) differences in the way preference data are modelled. Given the implications of using the 5L value set instead of the 3L value set, it is important to understand the contribution of each factor. Aims: To examine the effect on the value sets of the specific approaches taken to modelling. The innovative modelling approaches used in modelling the 5L value set are applied to the 3L data. Isolating the effect of the modelling methods provides a better basis for comparing the two value sets. Data: TTO data from 2,997 respondents and 912 respondents in the UK 3L and English 5L valuation studies respectively. Methods: 3L and 5L TTO data are modelled addressing data censoring; heteroscedasticity in the errors; and heterogeneity in preferences. Linear regressions provide the comparison baseline. Censored regressions without accounting for the heteroscedasticity nor heterogeneity are estimated using the maximum likelihood method. Censored models with no heteroscedasticity, heteroscedasticity alone, and both heteroscedasticity and heterogeneity being taken into account are estimated using Bayesian methods. Comparisons are made between estimated coefficients from different modelling methods, and between the predicted index values. Results: Results suggest differences between the UK 3L and English 5L value sets are primarily caused by differences in the underlying preference data, particularly the large number of values < 0 in the former. Applying the 5L modelling methods to 3L valuation data would yield a different value set with different properties than the existing UK 3L value set. However, the modelling methods exert a greater magnitude of difference on the 5L values than on the 3L values. Results raise questions about the interpretation of the constant in value functions.
