Supported by the EuroQol Research Foundation, all researchers were invited to participate in an introductory workshop on choice and latent-class analysis in health valuation. Taught by Benjamin M. Craig and Suzana Karim, this free online workshop had three group sessions, two tutoring sessions, and two hands-on exercises using the R programming language and paired comparison data. Any researcher could register for any session for free. Attendees who participated in all sessions and complete both exercises will receive a EuroQol Workshop Certificate shortly. Session 1 (10 June): Applied Choice Analysis in Health Valuation The first session covered the conditional logit and heteroskedastic logit models. Dr. Craig presented the slides and led the discussion (40 minutes followed by a 10-minute break), and Ms. Karim introduced the Dutch EQ-5D-Y paired comparison data and its R code (40 minutes). After the session, attendees were invited to complete an optional hands-on exercise in R and discuss their results during a follow-up tutoring session (30 minutes), allowing for personalized feedback on how to estimate an EQ-5D value set (pits scaled). Session 2 (17 June): Latent Class Analysis in Health Valuation The second session extended the heteroskedastic logit model to its latent class counterpart, introducing grade-of-memberships, model selection, and interpretation. After the session, attendees were invited to complete a second exercise in R and discuss their results during a follow-up tutoring session (30 minutes), allowing for personalized feedback on how to estimate an EQ-5D value set (pits scaled) for each latent class. Session 3 (24 June): Applications and Advanced Topics in Health Valuation In the third session, Dr. Craig covered applications and advanced topics, including time preferences, response behaviors, scale-adjusted latent class (SALC) analyses, and random parameters. After the break, Ms. Karim briefly introduced three examples from her dissertation (Dutch BWS, Peru EQ-5D-5L, and US EQ-5D-5L). They concluded this session with a discussion on econometric extensions and survey methods in health valuation. For Whom Anyone interested in health valuation, who understands the basics of the EQ-5D descriptive system and had estimated a conditional logit. Some knowledge of R and R studio was encouraged but not required. Stable internet access was required. Outcome This introductory workshop was designed to enhance the technical capacity of early career researchers (ECRs). Gaining the capacity to estimate EQ-5D value sets using choice data also prepares ECRs for advanced topics (e.g., time preferences).
