Background: The EQ-5D is a widely used instrument that measureshealth-related quality of life. Recently, the EQ-5D-Y was developed to measure health in children, but it has no independent value set. A recent multi-study country study funded by the EuroQol Research Foundation examined differences in valuations across instruments (EQ-5D vs. EQ-5D-Y) and study perspective (adult vs. child). Objective: To identify differences in valuation between adult’s and children’s instruments and perspectives, and examine how sociodemographic and otherfactors influence health state valuation to build a framework for valuing the EQ-5D-Y for use in health policy. Methods:Data were taken from a study of 805 subjects across four countries (UK, Germany, Spain, and the Netherlands). The subjectscompleted valuation exercises (TTO and DCE) and answered questions about their sociodemographic background and their reactions to the valuation tasks. The study was organized across four arms—using either the standard EQ-5Dor the EQ-5D-Y and within those groups, asked to adopt either an adult or child perspective. A censored regression model and several non-parametric tests were run to observe how particular sample characteristics and individual perspectives influenced valuation. In addition, linear and ordered probit regressions measured the subjects’ ability to imagine a child’s perspective and the effect perspective had on health states and dimensions.Results: There was a significant difference in valuation between adult and child perspective, as well as between the survey used (EQ-5Dand EQ-5D-Y). Nontrading was more common in the child perspective arm. As health severity increases, the children’s perspective had a less negative slope than the adult and was consistently higher valued. Subjects’country of residence had a significant effect on how difficult it was toimagine a child’s perspective, andthere is a difference in valuation between the specific types of child perspectives adopted. Whether or not the subject had children had a positive, significant effect on valuation; severity, survey, and perspective were also significant, as predicted. Conclusion: Subjects adopting a child’s perspective consistently gave higher TTO valuations than those in the adult perspective. The EQ-5D-Y also yielded higher valuations than the EQ-5D, but the extent of its impact must be researched further. Subjects with children also tend toprovide higher values. More insight is needed tounderstand how subjects adopt new perspectives, and future valuation exercises could provide more guidance about the perspective to be used prior to the exercises.
