Introduction. The EQ-5D valuation approach classifies health into profiles, which subsequently receive a unique value from an existing value function. Such a value function requires: (1) a sample of respondents valuing a subset of profiles, covering a small part of all possible profiles, <5% for EQ-5D-5L; (2) modelling of the data, allowing for interpolation of values of the remaining profiles. This is inevitable as no respondent can directly value all states (to create a 'saturated' dataset). Multiple choices on design and analysis in valuation studies are therefore present, where optimality (lack of misspecification) is determined by sample size, health state design, and the role of individual effects on the values and the use of the scale. We developed a simulation-analysis tool (SAT), which allows for finding an optimal set of choices. Methods. VAS data from the multinational EQ-5D-5L pilot valuation studies were used to derive a main effects model, including a random intercept for all individuals, as a prior for all simulations. The resulting coefficients (20 dummies, 1 intercept, variance contribution of the random individual effect (here 20%)) were input parameters for SAT. SAT consists of: I) a generator of a defined sample of saturated data records of hypothetical respondents; II) a tool to use any sub-selection of states to mimic a particular design; this can be repeated n times; III) a regression tool which estimates the models on the datasets resulting from I and II; IV) an analytical tool that compares the values of these regression models to the original simulated data (using a predefined part of the 3125 profiles not used in III); V) a presentation tool showing the misspecification pattern of the particular design. Design choices involved were: the numbers of respondents (200-2000), the proportion of states valued (40-800); state selection criteria (random, mild/top, severe/bottom, flat, stressed).Misspecification was expressed as mean absolute error (MAE). Scale-dependence of misspecification (top, bottom of VAS scale) was explored.Results. With 1000 respondents and 120 states, MAE was around 0.47, independent from selection (mild, severe, etc.). Using 40 states increased MAE (0.60), more in case of mild state selection (0.65). Increasing beyond 120 states did not significantly improve results. Over the range of 200-2000 respondents, the mean MAE decreased almost according to the inverse square root of the sample (MAE with n=2000 about 0.33). The MAE consistently differs along the VAS scale, being highest on top; this scale dependent misspecification is to a small degree dependent on set selection, and disappears if the number of states or number of respondents is high.Conclusions. If the underlying value function is adequately represented by a main effects model, then misspecification primarily depends on the number of respondents, as long as the number of states is around 80 - 120. The impact of set type is small, although mild selections performed worse. To avoid scale dependent heterogeneity of MAE, 500 seems the minimal number of respondents. We hypothesize that the 20% individual variance is the hitherto underestimated factor in misspecification, where designs could be more efficient (lower n) if the model contains a specified individual component rather than a random intercept. SAT is an extremely powerful and valuable tool to guide design choices in valuation studies.
