Objectives: The original EQ-5D-5L value set for China suffered from several limitations, including lack of sample representativeness, use of EQ-VT protocol V1.0 without a formal quality control procedure, without using the discrete choice experiment (DCE) data. This study aimed to re-estimate the EQ-5D-5L value set for China by addressing the abovementioned issues. Methods: In this study, following EuroQol Group protocols and approved by Guizhou Medical University, the researchers employed a robust experimental design with 240 choice sets for Discrete Choice Experiment (DCE) and 86 EQ-5D-5L health states for time trade-off (cTTO). Quota sampling ensured representation of the Chinese population across gender, age, education, and residence. Twelve provinces were chosen, aiming for 100 participants each. The interviewers, trained and quality-controlled for cTTO data collection, used both snowball and purposive sampling. Data collection via EQ-VT involved face-to-face interviews covering cTTO and DCE tasks. The analysis considered various model specifications, evaluating 48 models based on face validity, prediction performance (root mean squared error, mean absolute error, Lin’s concordance coefficient), and parsimony. The out-of-sample prediction method was used to evaluate model accuracy by leaving one of 10 blocks of health states out each time. Results: In this study conducted between July and September 2023, involving 1,206 participants from 15 regions in China. The researchers examined the demographic characteristics of their sample in comparison to the 7th National Population Census. The participants spent an average of 41.60 minutes completing interviews, with 28.09 minutes for the cTTO valuation task and 7.71 minutes for the DCE task. The quality of the cTTO data was generally good, with low protocol violation rates among interviewers. Approximately 22.99% of observations had negative values, and the cTTO values were effectively distributed, showing clustering at the lowest/highest values. We employed hybrid models combining cTTO and DCE data for value set modeling, with the CALE model selected based on its slightly better prediction performance and greater parsimony. The resulting value set, exhibited changes in the rank order of dimensions and a widened value range, emphasizing the significance of this updated EQ-5D-5L value set for China. Conclusion: This study estimated an updated EQ-5D-5L value set based on the preferences of a more representative general population sample in China, using both cTTO and DCE methods. The value set shows remarkable differences with the original value set estimated 11 years ago, which may reflect the evolving health preferences of the Chinese population.
