Thisis a preliminary report on ourstudy that investigates the links between EQ-5D and happiness. Firstwe review what has been published about EQ-5D and happiness. We then go on to a preliminary investigation of the relationships between happiness ratings and EQ-5D VAS and utility values in 5 data sets being: RLMS (Russia), GEM (4 Caribbean Basin countries), CliK (West Yorkshire), HSE and a Gallup International dataset covering Latin America. We then compare the findings of our analyses with those of previous studies that have investigated happiness and EQ-5D. Graham et al (2011) conducted the first analysis thatattempt to identify the impact of the 5 dimensions of EQ-5D on happiness. In a Gallup poll conducted in 2007, 14,000 respondents from 18 Latin American countries completed a survey that included the EQ-5D-3L instrument, a 0-10 VAS and Cantril’s ‘Ladder of Life Scale’, a 0 to 10 scale anchored at ‘best possible life’ (10) and ‘worst possible life’(0). This was the first data set that allowed EQ-5D dimensions and VAS scores to be mapped on to life satisfaction or happiness data. EQ-5D score was found to be strongly and significantly correlated with subjective health status (VAS) but much less so with life satisfaction (Cantril’s). Material goods (assets, telephones etc) were found to be more important to life satisfaction than to health satisfactionbyvirtue of having higher regression coefficients in the former. Levels 2 and 3 in EQ-5D dimensions were found to have less impact as explanatory variables in regression models with life satisfaction as the dependent variable than those with subjective health satisfaction as the dependent variable.Dolan and Metcalfe (2012) analysed the impact of the EQ-5D domains on Subjective Well Being (SWB) using regression models and life satisfaction questions:Overall, how satisfied are you with your life? (Using a 0-6 scale)Overall how did you feel yesterday? oRespondents had to express the strength of feeling on a 0-6 scale friendly, lethargic, stressed, happy, sad, calm, angry, tired, depressed and worried. oThe difference between average of positive and negative affect was used to create a new variable: ‘Day affect’Dolan and Metcalfe regressed Life Satisfaction (LS) and Day Affect (DA) separately on the EQ-5D domains using a utility model taken from Shaw et al (2006, i.e. including the D1, I2, and I3 interaction terms). This allowed a comparison of the impact of the EQ-5D dimensions on the LS and DA models with health preference (i.e. by comparing coefficients in the SWB models with the Shaw et al (2006) model). AD2 had a similar impact on both utility and SWB models. The remaining coefficients in the SWB models were much smaller than in the utility models, several of them were counter-intuitive (e.g. taking positive values), and none of the MO, SC or UA2 coefficients were significant at the 5% level in the two SWBmodels. Mukuria and Brazier (2013) used a SWB measure taken from the SF-6D instrument on EQ-5D states in a sample of 15,824 patients from a hospital in Wales. The SWB measure used in this study was the SF-36 question: Have you been happy?Respondents had five response options: All of the time; most of the time; some of the time; a little of the time; and none of the time. Ordered logit analysis produced a model with logically consistent (level 3 greater impact than level 2) and significant odds ratios at the 5% level (except MO3, SC3, UA3 and PD30). Anxiety/Depression was found to have the biggest impact.Karimi and Brazier (2016) investigated the meanings of and interrelationships between health, health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and Quality of Life (QoL). They pointed out that health is one (small) element of QoL, and that QoL is influenced by many ‘non-health’ factors. Hence, we should expect that EQ-5D dimensions would have different effects on HRQoL and QoL. Karimi and Braizer (2016) concluded that the HRQoL concept overlaps both health and QoL factors.Even within the domain of ‘health’ Shah et al (2016) reported that over 40% of their sample of 436 respondents identified factors that they considered to be important to health that were not included in EQ-5D. Sun et al (2016) analysed data from a survey undertaken in China (n=8,000) which included EQ-5D, EQ-VAS and a happiness question taken from the World Values Survey. Mean SWB was observed to increase with self reported health and with VAS values, and to decrease with increasing levels of problems on EQ-5D dimensions. OLS and ordered logit models showed logically consistent and significant (to the 5% level) coefficients for MO and AD with the latter having the highest absolute values.
