Background: The valuation of EQ-5D-Y (-3L/-5L) health states by adults has been a subject of ongoing discussion, particularly after publication of the valuation protocol in which adults perform valuation tasks for a 10-year-old child. Recent evidence indicates that the valuation of EQ-5D-Y health states may be influenced by adults’ fear of underestimating health problems when performing valuation tasks for a child or adolescent. Adults feel uncomfortable not knowing the health-state preferences of the child or adolescent and anticipate what their preferences might be. In fear of making a wrong choice, being considered a bad parent, or others bearing a grudge against them, adults compromise between their own preferences and the anticipated preferences of the child or adolescent. Furthermore, adults struggle with the responsibility of stating preferences for a child or adolescent. They believe that adolescents are able—and should be enabled—to make such decisions for themselves and that children should at least be consulted or (somehow) involved in these decisions. Adults’ belief that children and/or adolescents should be involved in the valuation of EQ-5D-Y health states runs parallel to the increased interest of researchers and policymakers to involve stakeholders in decisions on health and healthcare to improve the quality, relevance, and outcomes of research and policies, empower stakeholders, and promote the transparency and legitimacy of decisions. Nonetheless, insight into the desirability, feasibility, and needs of stakeholders (potentially) involved in and affected by the valuation of EQ-5D-Y health states, and the impact of their involvement on the valuation of EQ-5D-Y health states is currently lacking.  Aims: To provide insight into the desirability, feasibility, and impact of involving children (8–18 years) in the valuation of EQ-5D-Y health states by addressing four evidence gaps in successive work packages (WPs): • WP A provides insight into the theoretical/normative and empirical underpinning of involving stakeholders, in particular children, in decisions on health and healthcare. • WP B provides insight into whether and (further explores) why child and adult members of the public, and policymakers in healthcare believe that (somehow) involving children in the valuation of EQ-5D-Y health states would be desirable and feasible. • WP C provides insight into the various ways in which children can (potentially) be involved in the valuation of EQ-5D-Y health states, and into the necessary conditions and stakeholder support for putting these ways into practice. • WP D provides insight into the impact of involving children on the valuation of EQ-5D-Y health states.  General methods: To achieve the abovementioned aims, a combination of qualitative and quantitative methods will be applied; targeted review of the theoretical/normative and empirical literature, and (health) policy reports on stakeholder involvement (WP A), semi-structured interviews with children (8–18 years), adults, and policymakers (WP B), identification and description of the various ways in which children can be involved in the valuation of EQ-5D-Y health states based on previous results and semi-structured interviews with experts on child (mental) health and well-being (WP C), and impact assessment of the most promising way for involving children on the valuation of EQ-5D-Y health states (WP D).
