Introduction: EQ-5D-Y-3L valuation studies are now being conducted in several countries. The idea of health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is multifaceted and focuses on how a health condition and its treatment affect a person's daily life. Assessing young people's HRQoL will be crucial for the evaluation of treatments and for public health research, just as it is for the adult population. Even though the EQ-5D-Y version is receiving more attention, there are few data on the health of the youth population, particularly in the Middle East. The measurement and valuation of HRQoL outcomes, resource allocation, planning of healthcare interventions, and policy decision making for Saudi populations will all be significantly impacted by this research. Objectives: to estimate a value set for EQ-5D-Y-3L among Saudi Arabia's Youth population (8–15 years old) in terms of population health status. Methods: The study will employ a discrete choice experiment (DCE) exercise to ascertain the relative importance of each EQ-5D-Y level in each dimension using the valuation approach, as recommended by the EuroQol Group for EQ-5D-Y research. The latent scale DCE value set will then be anchored into the quality-adjusted life years (QALY) 0–1 scale using a data from a sample of composite time-trade off (C-TTO) interviews. A representative sample of 1000 adults interviews from the general community will be conducted as an online discrete choice experiment (DCE) to elicit preferences for the EQ-5D-Y health state, and 200 interviews will be done in a face-to-face interview using composite time trade-off (cTTO). The EQ-VT survey will take into account any Arabic translations. The questions will ask respondents to imagine a 10-year-old child living with the health problems described by the health state that is being valued. Responses from DCE and c-TTO will be collected through adults from the general population taking a discerned perspective: adults responding the elicitation tasks from what they would prefer for a 10 years old child perspective.
