Introduction: Different modes of administration (MoAs) have been used to administer the EQ-5D-Y, including self-complete questionnaire (SC) and interviewer administration (IA). Proxy-report is recommended for those who are unable to self-report their HRQoL e.g. young children, cognitively impaired or poor literacy. Objective: To assess and compare agreement and psychometric properties between SC, IA and proxy-report of EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-Y-3L Tigrinya Version. Methods: Psychometric performance and agreement between SC, IA and proxy-report of EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L Tigrinya paper version was assessed and compared among children aged 8–18 years. First, children and adolescents self-reported their health state on the corresponding version and then through IA. Thereafter, parents/guardians completed the corresponding EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L Tigrinya proxy-report version. Administration of the SC and IA versions was randomized and separated by an age-appropriate demanding cognitive task/problem- solving experiment. Agreement between MoAs was assessed at baseline only. Repeated measures were taken by self-report (SC and IA) and proxy-report to assess test-retest reliability (for unchanged health status) and responsiveness (for changed health status) after ten days and one month, respectively, using a one-item global rating (GRS) scale to assess change. MoAs were compared by analyzing agreement of dimension scores (using Gwet’s AC and agreement percentage) and for LSS and EQ-VAS (using ICC), test-retest reliability of dimension scores (using Gwet’s AC and Cohen’s) and for LSS and EQ-VAS (using ICC), known-group validity (using Kruskal-Wallis rank test), and responsiveness (using mean change, standardized effect size– SES, and area under the curve (AUC). Results: A total of 636 participants for EQ-5D-Y-3L and 644 participants for EQ-5D-Y-5L were included in the analysis. Most of the study participants in both EQ-5D-Y-3L (65.41%) and EQ-5D-Y-5L (68.63%) had a health condition. were school children/adolescents. The highest proportions of health problems were reported in the “Feeling worried/sad/unhappy” dimension for EQ-5D-Y-5L (level 2 to 5), whereas “Feeling worried/sad/unhappy” and “Having pain/discomfort” for EQ-5D-Y-3L (Level 2 to 3) across SC, IA, and proxy-report. For both EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-Y-3L, proxy consistently reported fewer "no problems" responses compared to SC and IA responses (χ² > 100, p  270, p < 0.001 for both SC and IA of EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-Y-3L). Respondents showed similar preference for IA and SC in EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-Y-3L. Regarding responsiveness the largest difference was detected in the SC and IA of both EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-Y-3L with SES in EQ-5D-Y-5L between 0.48-1.01(SC) and 0.21-0.73 (IA); and in EQ-5D-Y-3L between 0.90-1.58 (SC) and 0.38-1.87 (IA). Conclusion: Both the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L Tigrinya versions demonstrated good to excellent/almost perfect agreement and psychometric performance across SC, IA, and proxy-report versions. Proxy-reports showed a slightly lower in psychometric performance and lower agreement as compared to self-reports indicating some difference. The IA version could be recommended for children who are able to self-report but unable to self-complete the instrument due to poor literacy.
