Background: Assessing health-related Quality of Life (HRQoL) became an important objective in Alzheimer's Disease and other related Dementia Disorders. Although some studies have proven the validity of the EQ-5D-5L in measuring HRQoL in dementia, cognitive deficits are not covered by the five dimensions of the EQ-5D. Therefore, EuroQol (Mulhern-Sampson) has recently developed a new global cognition bolt-on (i.e. "cognition"), and analyses of the psychometric performance of this new global bolt-on in key conditions, such as Alzheimer's Disease and Dementia, are now urgently needed. Aim of research: (i) To quantitatively examine the psychometric properties of the global cognition bolt-on (i.e. "cognition") for the EQ-5D-5L using self- and caregiver-proxy-ratings, and (ii) qualitatively assess the content validity of the EQ-5D-5L+global cognition bolt-on item (i.e. "cognition") as well as bolt-on items for separate sub-dimensions (e.g. thinking ability, remembering) in patients with Alzheimer's Disease and other related dementia disorders and caregivers. Proposed methods: This mixed method study includes (i) quantitative psychometric analyses and (ii) a qualitative part with semi-structured interviews. (i) The psychometric analyses will be based on cross-sectional baseline data from the ENABLE study, a randomized controlled two‐armed study in Germany with 1,126 patients with mild to moderate dementia. Patient recruitment started in September 2024 and will finish in March 2026. Besides the EQ-5D-5L+cognition bolt-on self- (completed by patients) and proxy-proxy-rating (completed by carers), patients complete cognitive tests (MMSE, CDR-SB, ADAS-cog) and clinical procedures to identify cognitive dysfunction (Amyloid PET) and risk profile (blood sampling, ApoE4), instrumental Activities of Daily Living Scale (A-IADL-Q), depression (GDS), and a disease-specific HRQoL measure (Qol-AD, AD-5D). Acceptability (missing values), ceiling & floor effect, underlying latent structure (confirmatory factor analysis, item response theory), informativity (Shannon-indices), convergent validity (correlation coefficients), patient-proxy agreement/ inter-rater reliability (weighted Kappa), differential item functioning (Item Response Theory), and known-groups validity (effect sizes) of the EQ-5D-5L with and without the global cognition bolt-on will be explored. (ii) Among trial participants, interviews with 10-15 patients-caregiver dyads using the think-aloud technique will be completed to assess the content validity (comprehensibility, comprehensiveness and relevance) of the EQ-5D-5L+global cognition bolt-on as well as separate sub-dimension bolt-on items.  Benefits to the group: The proposed study will provide evidence concerning the acceptability and validity of the newly developed global cognition bolt-on of the EQ-5D-5L in dementia diseases using a large clinical dataset that includes clinical assessment batteries and imaging and plod procedures, providing a perfect basis to assess the psychometric performance of the global cognition bolt-on in a key condition. We will also give evidence on psychometric differences of the EQ-5D-5L+cognition bolt-on between self- and proxy-ratings and the comparative performance of the EQ-5D-5L+cognition bolt-on vs. disease-specific HRQoL measure, the QoL-AD (AD-5D). Finally, the qualitative part will demonstrate evidence concerning understanding the new cognition bolt-on.
