Objectives: Valuing child health, particularly in severe health states, involves more complex dilemmas for adults than valuing their own health state. Recent findings from the Indonesian EQ-5D-Y-3L valuation study have shown that adults were reluctant to assign any worse-than-dead values to child health states, suggesting difficulty in prioritizing severe health states in terms of preferences. This qualitative study investigates the reasoning behind adult responses when trading life years for children with a focus on severe health states.  Methods: Adults aged 17 and above, sampled to represent gender and age diversity, participated in composite time trade-off (cTTO) interviews using a think-aloud protocol. Participants evaluated 16 health states: 12 from the previous Indonesian EQ-5D-Y-3L valuation study and 4 newly introduced severe states. Following each cTTO task, participants engaged in semi-structured interviews to elaborate on their decision making. All procedures followed EuroQol’s quality control standards. To ensure values comparability with the earlier EQ-5D-Y-3L valuation study, independent sample t-test were conducted between the two samples. Qualitative data from think aloud and interviews were thematically analyzed.  Results: A final sample of 55 adults completed the study. For 8 out of 12 health states, the values were comparable to those in the original EQ-5D-Y-3L valuation study. Preliminary thematic analysis identified three key rationales influencing adult preferences in trading life years for children: (1) Assistance for children is viewed as normal. Mild to moderate impairments especially in the first three dimensions (mobility, washing/dressing, and usual activities) were seen as manageable with adult support, reducing willingness to trade life-years for children. (2) Children’s lives are valuable despite illness severity. Adults believed that children should be given the chance to experience life regardless of their condition. Many did not interpret ‘a lot of problems’ (qualifier of the worst level) in EQ-5D-Y-3L as indicating total incapacity, perceiving even limited function as a reason to preserve life.(3) Perceived incapacity in daily life. Children were seen as naturally active, spontaneous, and joyful. The lost of these characteristics was a primary factor shaping adults responses. When health conditions severely restricted a child’s ability to engage in daily activities, or when the burden on families and caregivers became overwhelming, participants were more willing to consider death as an acceptable preferences. This reflects a threshold at which life for children, in the absence of meaningful activity, was no longer viewed as worth preserving. Participant commonly expressed that death holds different meaning when applied to children versus adults.  Conclusion:This study provides insight into adult’s reluctance to trade life years for children in valuation study. Adults appeared to view life as more inherently valuable for children than for themselves, influenced by perception of dependency, beliefs about the worth of childhood life, and the perceived incapacity in daily life for children. These insight reveal how cultural values shape how adults value children’s health states.
