Patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) are central to evaluating the effectiveness of total knee arthroplasty (TKA). However, patients may adjust their internal standards (recalibration), reframe how they conceptualize certain questions (reconceptualization), and even shift their priorities (reprioritization) over time. These phenomena, collectively known as response shift (RS), can make PROM scores taken at different time points—such as before and after surgery— sometimes not directly comparable. Ignoring this RS may therefore obscure the estimation of intervention effect. As there is limited understanding of RS among TKA patients, this project examined RS among TKA patients, using data from the Institute for Improved Health Outcomes (IIHO, formerly the Alberta Bone and Joint Health Institute) across 13 surgical clinics in Alberta, Canada.Two advanced statistical methods were applied: Oort's structural equation modelling (SEM) to evaluate RS effects in Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC; disease-specific PROM), and the RespOnse Shift ALgorithm in Item Response Theory–Rasch Measurement Theory (ROSALI-RMT) to evaluate RS effects in EQ-5D-5L (generic PROM), for both short-term (pre-surgery vs. 3 months) and long-term (pre-surgery vs. 12 months) post-surgical follow-ups. Patient baseline characteristics (age, sex and baseline physical function) associated with the propensity for RS were also examined.The project found evidence of recalibration RS effects across all WOMAC domains for both short- and long-term post-surgical follow-ups. However, the effect sizes were small and did not significantly affect estimates of treatment effectiveness, suggesting that WOMAC remain robust to RS effects at the group level and can be used with reasonable confidence without adjustment. In contrast, EQ-5D-5L showed greater susceptibility to recalibration RS effects, with most dimensions affected at both follow-ups. Accounting for these shifts resulted in larger estimates of treatment benefit than conventional analyses, suggesting that standard approaches may underestimate the true health-related quality of life (HRQoL) gains associated with TKA. These RS effects also varied by patient baseline characteristics. Further, recalibration RS effects for EQ-5D-5L were more pronounced among patients who achieved meaningful functional improvement, and adjusting for these effects revealed substantially greater HRQoL benefits, highlighting the importance of considering variation in effects by treatment outcome.Considering RS effects is therefore important for interpreting PROM scores, particularly generic measures like EQ-5D-5L, at the patient, organizational, and policy levels.
