Background: Different modes of administration (MoAs) have been used to administer EQ-5D-Y-3L/-5L and other health-related quality of life (HRQoL) pediatric measurement scales, including self-administered ((e.g., paper and pencil, and digital survey) and interviewer-administered (e.g., face-to-face, telephone, and computer-administered). However, the impact of using different MoAs on health state reporting in children and adolescents is unclear. Objective: This scoping review mapped and characterized available evidence on health state score level of agreement and other assessed measurement properties between different MoAs of the EQ-5D-Y-3L/-5L and other pediatric HRQoL measurement scales to assess the impact of MoAs on health state score. Methods: A scoping review of studies that compared health state scores agreement and measurement properties across different MoAs for the EQ-5D-Y-3L/-5L or other HRQoL pediatric measurement scale was conducted. We searched eight databases from inception up to 30 August 2025 for studies reporting the health state scores, distributional characteristics and other measurement properties between different MoAs of EQ-5D-Y-3L/-5L and other HRQoL pediatric measurement scales. All titles/abstracts and full texts were reviewed by two reviewers independently using an online software platform called Covidence. Any disagreement regarding eligibility was discussed and resolved through group discussion between reviewers. Data were extracted in duplicate using a form developed and tested by the research team. Information on study characteristics, the types of analyses conducted, and the types of measurement property assessed between different MoAs was assessed. Results: We identified 18 studies, of which only two (11%) studies used the EQ-5D-Y measurement scale. These studies varied in design, measurement scales, recall periods, and the measurement properties evaluated. Twelve studies used MoA in the category of digital/internet vs paper based, five in the category of self-administered/self-complete vs interviewer administered and one study use both categories. A broad range of measurement properties (including feasibility, response distribution, reliability, and validity) were used to assess health state responses agreement and measurement properties between different MoAs of the EQ-5D-Y-3L/-5L and other pediatric HRQoL measurement scales. Nine studies (50%) did not assess feasibility, five (28%) did not report any agreement statistics, eight (44%) did not report either validity or reliability, and none of the included studies assessed responsiveness. Feasibility, validity, and reliability differed more between SC and IA MoA than between digital and non-digital modes. Using different MoA can influence measurement property outcomes in paediatric health state assessments, with greater discrepancies observed between SC and IA MoA than digital and paper versions. Conclusion: Despite the widespread availability of pediatric HRQoL measurement scales, evidence on the impact of MoA remains limited. Greater discrepancies between SC and IA MoA than digital and non-digital MoA suggest that the data collection MoA choices may influence health state reporting outcomes. Rigorous longitudinal studies, particularly those assessing responsiveness are important before different MoAs can be used as interchangeable.
