Background: The EQ-5D-5L has been criticized for limited responsiveness in detecting health changes in people living with dementia (PlwD). This study assessed its responsiveness compared to the disease-specific Quality of Life in Alzheimer's Disease (QoL-AD) scale using longitudinal data from a cluster-randomized controlled intervention trial.Methods: Data were derived from the German InDePendent trial, which evaluated a model of collaborative care. Health-related quality of life (HRQoL) was measured at baseline and at the six-month follow-up using the EQ-5D-5L, EQ Visual Analogue Scale (EQ VAS), and QoL-AD, through both self-reports and proxy reports. Responsiveness was analyzed using effect sizes (Cohen's d), which were anchored to intervention effects and changes in cognitive status, depressive symptoms, and care needs, and analyzed using linear mixed-effects models.Results: PlwD [mean age: 80.6] were predominantly female (56%) and mildly to moderately cognitively impaired (89%). Self-reported HRQoL scores were consistently higher than those reported by proxies. The intervention group showed modest but significant improvements in the EQ-5D-5L (d = 0.206) and EQ VAS (d = 0.160), but not in the QoL-AD (d = xx). In subgroups with cognitive improvement or reduced care needs, the EQ-5D-5L (d = 0.268) and EQ VAS (d = 0.415) also outperformed the QoL-AD (d = XX). For those with reduced depressive symptoms, all instruments were responsive, with the QoL-AD showing the strongest effect (d = 0.314). Responsiveness of proxy-reported changes was generally smaller.Conclusion: The EQ-5D-5L, as a generic measure of HRQoL, demonstrated sufficient responsiveness in dementia, particularly among patients receiving the collaborative care intervention and those experiencing cognitive or emotional improvement over 6 months. The EQ-5D-5L's simplicity and acceptability suggest practical utility in dementia research. In contrast, proxy ratings were less sensitive to change, possibly due to contextual factors, and, therefore, should be used with caution.
