Background: Measuring the impact of an individual’s health condition on their carers and wider family is important for understanding the wider consequences of illness and estimating the value of potential treatments and interventions. However, such spillover may evade capture via current measures of health-related quality of life (HRQL). The EQ Health and Wellbeing instrument (EQ-HWB) is a 25-item measure of health and wellbeing and was partly designed to assess carer burden. A 9-item short form measure (EQ-HWB-S) has also been developed suitable for valuation work. This study is designed to assess the validity of the EQ-HWB (long and short form) as a measure of spillover among carers and wider family members in comparison to the EQ-5D-5L and the CarerQol. Objective: To explore the construct validity of the EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S as measures of spillover among carers and wider family members against the EQ-5D-5L and CarerQol. Specifically, quantitative survey data will be used to explore:  Discriminant / known-groups validity: To determine whether each of the measures is able to discriminate between key characteristics, including carer status as well as intensity and duration of that caregiving. Convergent validity: To explore the strength of correlation between related items/constructs across measures  Methods: A large sample (N≈1,500) of UK carers and family members of individuals with health conditions will be invited to participate in an online cross-sectional survey. We will also recruit a large comparison sample of people without experience of caring an individual with a health condition (N=~500). ≈A background survey will be used to collect demographic information and to categorise participants based on whether they are a carer or family member of someone with a health condition. Carers will be asked questions to determine the extent of their caregiving role (e.g., time spent caring, intensity of caregiving tasks). All participants will complete the EQ-HWB and EQ-5D descriptive systems. Carers will also complete the CarerQol. Analyses will include item-level analyses for each measure (distributions, ceiling and floor effects) and assessments of discriminant and convergent validity.
