Lebanon has undergone severe socio-economic deterioration over recent years, marked by currency collapse, inflation, shortages of basic goods, and declining public services. These conditions, compounded by the Beirut Port Explosion and the COVID-19 pandemic, have likely impacted health, well-being, food security, and psychological distress nationwide. This study aimed to measure health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and its determinants among the general adult population in Lebanon using the EQ-5D-5L; explore the relationship between food insecurity and HRQoL as measured by the EQ-5D-5L; and evaluate the construct validity of the EQ-5D-5L in this population.A cross-sectional survey was conducted between April and September 2024 among 519 adults residing in Lebanon (mean age 38.2±16.5 years; 57.7% female), following an age, sex and region-based quota sampling approach. Participants completed the EQ-5D-5L, SF-12v1, Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES), Beirut Distress Scale (BDS-22), Patient Health Questionnaire 2-items (PHQ-2), Generalized Anxiety Disorder 2-items (GAD-2), and a series of socio-demographic questions including age, gender, educational level, income, employment status, nationality, number of people living in a household, and self-perceived change in overall health and in physical and mental health. Construct validity of EQ-5D-5L was assessed through convergent/divergent and known-groups validity. Regression models examined predictors of HRQoL, distress, and food insecurity.Most participants reported no problems in mobility (77.3%), self-care (91.4%), and usual activities (74.1%); however, pain/discomfort (55.2% Levels 2–5) and anxiety/depression (43.1% Levels 2–5) were highly prevalent. Ceiling effect was 21.8% and floor effect 0.2%. Mean (SD) EQ-VAS was 74.2 (19.0) and total sum score was 7.8 (3.2). Participants with fair/poor health reported significantly worse EQ-5D-5L dimension scores and lower EQ-VAS. Known-groups validity was supported, with moderate-to-large effect size differences across disease groups for both EQ-5D-5L TSS and EQ-VAS. EQ-5D-5L dimensions demonstrated expected correlation patterns with SF-12 and BDS, supporting convergent and divergent validity. HRQoL was significantly associated with food insecurity and psychological distress. Predictors of lower EQ-VAS included older age (B=-0.421, p<0.001) and worse perceived income (B=-4.596, p<0.001), while the physical impact of the crisis was positively associated (B=4.536, p=0.008).Importantly, data collection occurred before the recent Israeli war on Lebanon (September– November 2024); therefore, the additional impact of this event is not captured in these findings. Although data from this study are considered "pre-war" data, the dataset can still be used to examine various research questions related to the performance of the measures, and the relationship of various socio-economic factors with quality of life.This study provides the first population-level EQ-5D-5L HRQoL data for Lebanon during ongoing national crises, highlighting substantial pain/discomfort and mental health burden. The EQ-5D-5L demonstrated strong measurement properties, supporting its use for population health monitoring and future valuation work in Lebanon.
