This grant was used to support the dissemination of research findings through an oral presentation at the ISPOR Europe 2025 Conference, which took place on 9th-12th Nov 2025 in Glasgow, Scotland. The study linked to SG-1792, entitled “Utilizing LLMs to Enhance Patient-Reported Outcome Measures: Application to the EQ-5D and Bolt-ons", was presented as one of 4 presentations in the session of 12 Nov at 10:00 entitled "Patient Preferences in Clinical Trials and HTA". This project (SG-1792) was funded by the EuroQol Research Foundation as a Seed Grant. The session was attended by approximately 100 ISPOR Europe attendees, including experts from academia, government, and industry with interests in HTA/HEOR methods, quality of life research, patient reported outcomes, etc. Submitted abstract for the presented research: OBJECTIVES: Large language models (LLMs) have shown promising applications in healthcare, yet little is known about their potential to improve the measurement of patient-reported outcomes, which are central to inform decision-making across health system levels. We explored the use of LLMs to develop or extend patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) based on information from patient-reported free-text data. METHODS: The GPT-4o model was used to analyze data from 1,977 members of the Dutch Celiac Association who completed the EQ-5D-5L and narratively described the impact of celiac disease on their lives. Prompts to the LLM were designed to identify possible additional dimensions (i.e., ‘bolt-on’ dimensions) to the EQ-5D-5L, and to produce preliminary bolt-on item wordings for selected dimensions. Evaluation of the approach comprised: comparisons of dimensions identified by two alternative approaches (i.e., qualitative analysis and topic modelling);text-entry level agreement (i.e., Cohen’s Kappa) on identified dimensions; suitability of LLM-generated bolt-on wordings assessed against existing criteria using Likert scales; and a critical appraisal consisting of face validity assessments and a SWOT analysis. RESULTS: The LLM identified 12 potential bolt-on dimensions to the EQ-5D-5L, of which 9 were also identified using qualitative analysis, and 5 using topic modelling. Text-entry level agreement between the LLM and qualitative approaches was ‘substantial’ or ‘almost perfect’, with two exceptions of poor/fair agreement (median Kappa=0.70, IQR=0.44-0.89). The LLM-generated potential bolt-on wordings for the 4 most common dimensions (i.e., ‘Dietary restrictions’, ‘Fatigue’, ‘Social participation’, and ‘Gastrointestinal symptoms’) scored 4/5, 4.4/5, 4.3/5, and 4.2/5 respectively when assessed against existing criteria. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the promising potential of LLMs to inform the development or modification of PROMs based on patient-reported text data. A limitation to generalizability and reliability is the approach’s dependency on prompt quality. Further research should assess the approach’s transferability across disease areas and different data sources (e.g. social media, EHRs).
