Background: Haemophilia is a rare genetic bleeding disorder caused by a deficiency, or complete absence, of clotting factor VIII in haemophilia A or factor IX in haemophilia B. The impact of haemophilia upon health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is a key factor for decisions made by health technology assessment bodies. Hence, the suitability of alternative generic preference-based measures (GPBMs) is of great importance to ensure the adequacy of evidence about the HRQoL impacts of haemophilia. Objective: This systematic review examined the psychometric performance of GPBMs of HRQoL in adults with haemophilia. Methods: A systematic review was conducted to retrieve relevant studies assessing the psychometric performance of different GPBMs. After conducting searches of electronic databases, as well as a grey literature search, identified studies were screened. Data were extracted to describe the study population, approach, and psychometric performance measures. Results: In total, 4502 studies were retrieved. After screening, 200 studies were included for full text review. Having excluded non-relevant studies, a total of 52 papers (43 studies) were included. Of 43 studies, 34 examined Known-group validity, 15 examined convergent validity, and 9 assessed responsiveness. Only two studies assessed the reliability. A total of 15 studies explored multiple aspects of interest. The psychometric performance of the EQ-5D-5L/3L in people with haemophilia (PwH) was generally good, with evidence of known-group validity, convergent validity, and responsiveness found. Although limited in use, evidence supporting the construct validity of the SF-6D was found. Evidence was limited for the HUI2 and HUI3 as they were used in only one study. More, no studies using the 15D and AQoL were included. Conclusions: The review outlines the use of and psychometric performance of GPBMs. It shows where evidence is strong (validity), and where there are gaps in the evidence base around reliability and responsiveness. The results support the use of the EQ-5D and SF-6D in assessing the HRQoL impacts of haemophilia. Limited evidence exists for to other GPBMs which had very limited or no application in studies identified.
