The following was presented as a workshop at ISPOR Europe 2024 in Barcelona Spain. ISPOR Europe is a health economic and outcomes research (HEOR) conference that is attended by those working in industry, academia, government and more. This year ISPOR Europe 2024 had more than 6,5000 attendees. This is the abstract that was submitted to ISPOR: Going Beyond Health-Related Quality of Life: Towards a Broader QALY Measure for Use Across Sectors: Introducing the EQ Health and Wellbeing Short (EQ-HWB-S) Discussion Leader: Aureliano Paolo Paolo Finch, PhD, The University of Economic Studies, Amsterdam, NH, Netherlands; Discussants: Jeremy Dietz, MSc, Science Policy & Research Programme, National Institute for Health and Care Excelllence, Bristol, BST, UK; Reva Efe, MD, MSc, Geneesmiddelenbeoordeling, Zorginstituut Nederland, Diemen, NH, Netherlands; Andrew Lloyd, DPhil, Acaster Lloyd, London, London, UK PURPOSE: ‘Value measurement: Assessing Value and QALY Alternatives’ remains a key trend in health economics and outcomes research. The goal of this workshop is to raise awareness of the EQ-HWB (EQ Health and Wellbeing instrument). The workshop will also explore the opportunities and strengths perceived by the speakers and audience on using the EQ-HWB-S, both from the perspective of health technology assessment (HTA) agencies and industry. DESCRIPTION: The EQ-HWB has been designed as a standardised measure of broader aspects of quality of life related to health, social care and informal carers enabling assessment of interventions that are delivered in health, including public health, and social care. A short version, the EQ-HWB-S, can be used to generate QALYs for HTA. The instrument has experimental status which has enabled collaborators and researchers to assess its performance in diverse populations. ZIN, the HTA agency for the Netherlands, has named it as a potential measure for use when evaluating interventions in chronic conditions. Understanding the views of those who will use the tool and appraise it are important to consider. In this workshop, Mr. Dietz will discuss the NICE reference case in relation to where deviations from the EQ-5D are allowed (10 minutes). Mr Finch will introduce the EQ-HWB and how it was developed and emerging evidence on its performance (10 minutes). Dr Efe will talk about ZIN’s decision to include the EQ-HWB in their methods document, ‘Guideline for economic evaluations in healthcare (2024 version)’ (10 minutes). Mr Lloyd will discuss their plans to use the EQ-HWB and provide an industry perspective (10 minutes). The workshop will allocate 20 minutes for an interactive audience discussion, including question and answer sessions. Audience views of the instrument and its potential use will be sought using polling to encourage active participation and engagement.
