Introduction: The EQ-5D-5L was introduced to improve sensitivity of the instrument and to reduce ceiling effects. The first group of countries globally, including England, Canada, the Netherlands, Spain and China, have each undertaken value set studies. Interestingly, instances of inconsistent ordering of level coefficients are found in four countries, but not in China. Aims: This study aims to empirically test two possible explanations for the inconsistent ordering of level coefficients in the EQ-5D-5L value sets including (1) logical inconsistency in the valuation data in particular the Time Trade-Off (TTO) data and (2) econometric modelling approaches used in the various valuation studies. Data: Data collection in England and China followed the V1 EQ-VT experimental design. The data sets include 996 respondents in England and 1,296 respondents in China. Methods: We explored the logical inconsistency of respondents in the TTO valuation tasks in England and China using five alternative measures: an inconsistency dummy variable; inconsistency rate; inconsistency distance; inconsistency size and adjusted inconsistency score. We also explored the effects of factors (i.e. socio-demographic characteristics of respondents, interviewer effect, TTO block design) that might have an effect on logical inconsistency in the TTO data. A simple exploration on the DCE tasks for logical inconsistency was also conducted. Comparisons were made between the English and Chinese data for all tasks. Finally, we applied four key models that were developed from the EQ-5D-5L value set for England to the Chinese data to explore the impact of model choice on the inconsistent ordering of level coefficients. Results: Our results suggested that the logical inconsistency in the TTO tasks, using all five measures, was much more severe in the English data than that in the Chinese data. Respondents in China with older age, being male, and who spent more time in the TTO tasks were associated with lower level of logical inconsistency. In England, respondents who reported better health measured by EQ-VAS showed lower inconsistency scores for the TTO tasks. We cannot rule out the effects of TTO block design nor interviewer effects on the logical inconsistency in the TTO tasks. Simple comparison between the DCE data in China and England on the number of times that respondents selected choice A or B showed very similar pattern. Finally, we found no inconsistent ordering of level coefficients in modelling Chinese data regardless of model choice nor type of valuation data. Conclusion: We find evidence of substantially lower levels of logical inconsistency in the Chinese TTO valuation data compared to the English data. It offers an important explanation for the logically consist coefficients in the value sets that we observed using the Chinese data but not in other countries which were part of the first wave of the 5L valuation studies. Key words: Inconsistent Ordering, EQ-5D-5L, Value Set, Valuation Study, Health Utilities
