Background: The EQ-HWB and its short form, EQ-HWB-9, were designed to capture both health and broader aspects of wellbeing across health and social care contexts. A Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) is being considered to complement the descriptive system by providing a respondent-centred summary rating of overall health and wellbeing. However, transferring the VAS concept from the EQ-5D to the EQ-HWB raises conceptual and methodological challenges, as the construct extends beyond health, involves multiple user groups (patients, social care users and carers), and must function equivalently across languages and cultures. In parallel, the EQ-HWB Working Group is reviewing item polarity. In the experimental (2022) version of EQ-HWB long form, there were three positively framed items ( felt accepted, felt good about self, and could do things as wanted to) that were revised as negatively framed in the modified (2024) version to ensure consistency across the items of the instrument. The wording of the “nothing to look forward to” item was also revised to “felt hopeless”. These      refinements require qualitative evidence to inform instrument development decisions.Objectives: This study aims (1) to explore respondents’ understanding and interpretation of potential EQ-HWB VAS versions across different languages and cultural contexts, (2) to qualitatively examine the relevance and comprehensibility of both the positively and negatively framed versions of the three modified EQ-HWB items, and (3) to investigate participants’ interpretations of the revised “hopeless” item, given that the final wording has not yet been determined.Methods: This cross-country qualitative study will conduct a pooled secondary analysis of existing interview data collected during the EQ-HWB modification studies in Indonesia, Germany, Slovenia, and Hungary. Across countries, semi-structured interviews were conducted with patients, informal carers and social care users, who completed and discussed the EQ-HWB descriptive system and the VAS versions. Probing questions explored what respondents thought the VAS was asking them to do, what recall period or reference they considered, whether the VAS was a meaningful summary of how they overall felt, how they interpreted alternative anchor labels (health, health and wellbeing, health and quality of life, and quality of life), and how they understood and related the concepts of health, quality of life and wellbeing. In countries where polarity testing was conducted (Indonesia, Slovenia, and Hungary), additional probes examined comprehension and relevance of the positive and negative item versions, including the “hopeless” item. Thematic analysis will be conducted centrally, with harmonized coding frameworks and iterative team discussions. Analysis will focus on cross-country and cross-group comparisons by examining similarities and differences by respondent type (e.g., caregivers, patients, social care users) and linguistic or cultural context.
