Report Findings from CUHK’s Research Team (PI: Professor Eliza Wong) based on CUHK recruitments Developing a value set for the child-friendly EQ-5D Health-related Quality of Life instrument EQ-5D-Y in Hong Kong Background: The EQ-5D-Y is currently used to assess health-related quality of life of health states experienced by youth populations. However, there is no country-specific EQ-5D-Y value set available currently for the local Chinese population. Recent research indicates that using adult value sets to EQ-5D-Y states is inappropriate. However, developing valuation studies for the child population presents challenges. This study aimed to develop a value set for the EQ-5D-Y by the local adult population in a child perspective in HK following the recommended valuation proposal for EQ-5D-Y studies by the EuroQol Group. Methods: A cross-sectional valuation survey was conducted between December 2021 and July 2023 among the adult Chinese population aged 18 or above. During the interview, the participants either completed a discrete choice experiment (DCE) exercise or a composite time-trade off (C-TTO). The DCE was applied to estimate the relative importance associated with each EQ-5D-Y level in each dimension, while the C-TTO was used to anchor the latent scale DCE value set into the quality-adjusted life years (QALY) 0-1 scale. Both the DCE and the C-TTO were administered through computer-assisted personal interviews using the EQ-PVT platform, following the international valuation protocol for EQ-5D-Y-3L established by the EuroQol Group. The respondents answered either DCE and C-TTO questions from a child perspective to obtain their preferences. Hong Kong’s value set was estimated based on the responses of the DCE and C-TTO collected from the valuation survey. Results: A total of 1,396 HK Chinese adults aged 18 or above responded to the study, with a response rate of 22.0% (1,396/6,340). However, missing values were identified among 161 respondents. Thus, the responses from these 161 respondents were excluded, leaving a total of 1,235 respondents with complete information were included in the study, comprising of 1,030 completed DCE exercises and 205 completed the C-TTO valuation tasks from a child perspective. The value set model of EQ-5D-Y is established for the HK children population. Conclusions: This study elicits health preferences of the adult Hong Kong population from a child’s perspective using EQ-5D-Y-3L and the generated value sets, allowing the implementation of a cost-utility analysis for the youth population in Hong Kong. Report Findings from HKU’s Research Team (Dr. Carlos Wong) Comparisons of Preferences Towards EQ-5D-Y-3L Health States Between Adult Own and Child Perspectives Objectives: The international valuation protocol for EQ-5D-Y-3L recommends elicitation of utilities using adults’ preference for a hypothetical 10-year-old child. Published studies have reported preference difference in adults when valuing for a child and valuing for themselves. This study aimed to obtain EQ-5D-Y-3L preferences in Hong Kong and understand the preference difference between the adult own perspective and the child perspective. Methods: We recruited 1,000 and 200 adults in Hong Kong to value EQ-5D-Y-3L health states using discrete choice experiment (DCE) and composite time trade-off (cTTO), respectively. DCE respondents were randomized to complete tasks from either adult own perspective or child perspective. cTTO respondents completed valuation from the child perspective. Relative attribute importance (RAI) scores were compared between perspectives. Utility values were obtained by anchoring on the worst health state for both perspectives. Results: Both perspectives had similar RAI scores, rankings of dimensions, rescaled coefficients, and elicited values. Rank order of five dimensions, from highest to lowest importance, was ‘having pain or discomfort’, ‘doing usual activities’, ‘feeling worried, sad, or unhappy’, ‘mobility’, and ‘looking after myself’ for both perspectives. The most important and least important dimensions were ‘having pain or discomfort’ and ‘looking after myself’ respectively, consistent with published EQ-5D-Y-3L value sets. Conclusions: This study reported no remarkable preference difference for EQ-5D-Y-3L health states between the adult own and child perspectives, offering insights to the development of EQ-5D-Y-5L valuation protocol. Adherence to the current international valuation protocol is recommended.
