Patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) that collect patients’ perspectives of their symptoms, quality of life (QoL) and functionality are increasingly being used in routine clinical settings, including oncology services. However, challenges in the implementation and uptake of PROMs and using patient-reported outcomes (PROs) in the delivery of routine care remain. Collecting PROMs data without subsequently discussing the PRO results with the patients can demotivate them to answer subsequent questionnaires. In December 2020, the Northern Region Head and Neck Cancer Service began collecting PROMs: EQ-5D-5L as a generic measure and FACT-H&N as a more disease-specific measure of functional outcome. PROMs are routinely collected by the service across the duration of the patient's follow-up (at baseline around the time of diagnosis, then 6, 12, 18 and 24 months follow-up) but we have identified challenges in effectively using PROs in the routine clinically setting when discussing treatment and management. The primary objective of this study is to investigate factors that may be influencing (positively or negatively) the integration of PROs into routine clinical care. The study will also address the role of healthcare professionals in integrating PROMs and PROs into the clinic routine. We will use a qualitative research method, with focus group discussions using a semi-structured interview guide. The study population will be healthcare professionals (surgeons, oncologists, radiologists, pathologists, dentists and nurse specialists) from the northern region of Aotearoa New Zealand. The factors that we hope to identify from this study may be generalisable to other head and neck oncology services and, also oncology services more broadly. The findings of this study may be relevant to non-oncology services looking to implement PROMs successfully and use PROs at their routine clinic. We also expect the study to identify a number of other research questions and therefore 'seed' further research on the use of PROMs in clinical care.
