Objective The overall aim of this study was to explore similarities and differences in perceptions of QoL, as defined by EQ-HWB, among different groups of populations, including patients, carers and the healthy general publics. Methods This study used Q-methodology to investigate the subjective constructions of QoL across the groups. We developed a list of 34 Q-sample items (24 EQ-HWB items + 10 unique Chinese QoL items) that can be used in the Q-sort ranking activity to elicit participants preference across various aspects of quality of life (QoL). We collected a total of 151 Q-sort data for use in the standard by-person factor analytic procedure designed for Q-methodology. We also conducted post-sort interviews and obtained qualitative information about why they ranked the statements in certain ways, which can help the interpretation of the output data. Results We were able to identify four distinct viewpoints: Factor 1: Eat well, sleep well, be well; Factor 2: Positive relationships, belongings and well-being; Factor 3: My own feelings matter for well-being; Factor 4: Physical health is the foundation of well-being. While Factor 4 was equally valued across all three categories of participants, Factor 2, which places a high value on positive relationships, was predominantly represented by carers. In contrast, patients tended to emphasise Factor 3, which focuses on individual feelings—particularly emotional and physical distress. Items related to pain, discomfort, and sleep, which are part of EQ-HWB, were consistently identified as the most important across all four identified views. Nearly all EQ-HWB items were rated as highly relevant by at least one view in our study, which further supports the relevance of EQ-HWB in capturing individuals’ QoL. Conclusion This study presents the similarities and differences of the subjective constructions of QoL across patients, carers and the healthy general publics. It provides conceptual evidence to show that EQ-HWB can have a variety of targeting audiences. It also implies the variances of preferences in evaluating QoL, and such variances can consequently affect the measurement and evaluation of QoL.
