This PhD-project investigated the broad potential of the use of EQ-5D and other PROMs in routine clinical care application in orthopedic surgery. The use of PROMs covered both of quality enhancement endevours and empirical research into specific problems. While doing so, several methodological challenges were addressed. First, (1) we conducted a systematic review on the use of EQ-5D and other PROMs in quality improvement tools; the scope was extended to other clinical fields (1 paper accepted). Next, (2) we used Dutch Arthroplasty Registry data to study the presence, patterns and pathways of socio-economic inequalities in total hip and knee arthroplasty patients. This research illustrated the meaningful performance of EQ-5D as indicator of inequalities along other PROMs via multiple techniques (1 paper published; 1 submitted). With the same dataset, we (3) quantified the impact of the COVID-19 lockdown on EQ-5D and other PROMs, illustrating the performance of EQ-5D as public health indicator of a health disaster with national magnitude (1 paper published). (4) We compared head-to-head the EQ-5D-5L and EQ-5D-Y-5L in adolescents with scoliosis, where the hypothesis to reject was that they are incomparable (1 under review). Finally, we (5) conducted a quality of care data analysis using national Medicare (US) data on arthroplasty interventions, in the context of a scientific exchange program supervised by dr. J. Poeran (NY, US). The relative importance of hospital, patient, and socio-economic factors, and their interaction, was addressed (1 paper published). The PhD-manuscript incorporating these studies has been submitted for evaluation, and is expected to be publicly defended in the first half of 2025 at Erasmus University Rotterdam. Its title runs “Patient-Reported Outcomes in Orthopedic Surgery: Enhancing Care Quality and Reducing Socioeconomic Inequality”. Over the course of the PhD trajectory, the candidate has contributed in several ways to the scientific processes both at Erasmus MC (dpt of Orthopedic Surgery) and the EuroQol Research Foundation, both related to the topics of the project, and unrelated (the EuroQol PhD network).
