Objectives To describe the concept of health, traditionally, the WHO definition is used. During the time this definition was first set out, morbidity mainly featured infectious diseases, while today chronic diseases are much more prevalent. Medicine has changed from ‘illness-centered ’to ‘patient centered’ by integrating the patient perspective. Additionally, with increasing life expectancy, more people receive ‘care’, instead of ‘cure’. In line with the shift from viewing disease as a state, to thinking of it as a process, the life-span perspective takes into account how a persons perceived health condition depends on how they grow, develop, and decline. There is also a concern that existing health instruments, which predominantly rely on consensus and expert opinion of health care professionals, have no adequate content coverage of the concept of health from the perspective of the individual patient, especially in regard to particular patient groups. These changes and concerns indicate that there is a demand for measures including other health aspects to evaluate treatment effectiveness. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to identify studies that reported on the development of instruments from the patients’ perspective and to describe which health aspects are relevant from this perspective. Methods Systematic review to identify studies that reported on the development of instruments from the patients’ perspective. Attributes were extracted from the papers, and categorized into domains and duplicate or equal terms were merged. The final list of attributes is presented, and compared to existing preference-based instruments (e.g., EQ-5D, HUI, SF-6D). ResultsAn electronic database search initially generated 855 records. After screening the titles and abstracts, 680 papers were excluded. The main reasons were that the paper reported on a ‘hard’ clinical outcome. Seventy-six papers remained for full text screening. During this process another 32 papers were excluded for various reasons. Mainly because of the concept (i.e. quality of care). From the remaining 44 studies, 801 attributes that are important from the patients’ perspective were extracted and categorized in four domains (mental, physical, social and other). Physical symptoms represented the largest group. Conclusions Existing generic preference-based instruments are relatively older instruments compared to the generic instruments developed with patient input, and therefore might not be representative for the current health care practice (patient-centered care). The generic instruments developed with patient input do not cover the entire life span. Youth and elderly are not represented in these measures. Therefore, the content coverage of the existing instruments might be inadequate.
