Objectives Earlier work demonstrated that the time trade-off (TTO) method generates higher utilities when a 10-year child’s perspective is used in the EQ-5D-Y valuation compared to the adult perspective. However, prior studies did not apply existing theoretical frameworks to examine the underlying reason why different perspectives impact valuation. In this study, we employed construal level theory (CLT) to explore how the child and adult perspectives impact valuation in EQ-5D-Y. Specifically, we aimed to investigate how four facets of psychological distance modelled in CLT (social, temporal, spatial, and hypothetical) could affect the mean, variance, and internal validity of EQ-5D-Y utilities. Methods Online computer-assisted personal composite TTO (cTTO) interviews were conducted with a sample of 150 adults from the UK. Each respondent valued four health states in perspectives that were comprised of a combination of different levels of four facets of the psychological distance. We created low or high psychological distance by asking respondents to complete TTO tasks for, i) themselves (low social distance) or others (high social distance), ii) people at their own age (low temporal distance) or 10-year-old children (high temporal distance), iii) people in their own city (low spatial distance), or elsewhere (high spatial distance), iv) health states they were familiar with (low hypothetical distance) or unfamiliar with (high hypothetical distance). These different perspectives were combined in a factorial design to estimate the unique contribution of each distance to EQ-5D-Y valuation. Results Our findings show that mean utilities tend to increase as the psychological distance becomes higher, although the strength and magnitude of that effect depends on which dimension of social distance is increased. Furthermore, in line with predictions based on CLT, lower variance is observed in higher (social and temporal distance as respondents may think more abstractly when subjects are further away, resulting in less disagreement. Data quality is not affected when psychological distance increases from low to high in all dimensions. Conclusions In conclusion, the increased psychological distance introduced with the EQ-5D-Y valuation perspective (compared to adults’ valuation), as understood from CLT, may explain why utilities have been found to differ between perspective.
