EQ-5D is the most widely used quality of life measure in health economics and outcomes research around the world including the Asian region. The 1stEuroQol Asia Academy Meeting was successfully held in Guangzhou, China on 11-12 June 2019, bringing 38 researchers from Asian countries and 5 senior EuroQol members together for sharing, learning, discussing, and collaborating their research and expertise. There were 40 abstracts submitted of which 26 were discussed in the meeting: 14 as paper and 12 as poster presentation. A range of topics were covered, including (i) the similarities and differences of health-related quality of life concepts between Asia and the western counties, (ii) additional EQ-5D dimensions that specific to Asian population (e.g., sleep and eat), (iii) problems (and solutions offered) of completing the EQ-5D questionnaires and valuation study in rural and illiterate respondents, (iv) the application of EQ-5D youth version in Asian countries that also possible to be used by adult respondents who have difficulties to complete the adult version (v) valuation studies, (vi) application of the questionnaires in different populations. Several interesting findings were resulted from studies employed qualitative method, rarely discussed in the general plenary meeting. Ideas of collaboration were discussed, among them are: investigate the (bolt-ons) dimensions thatspecific to Asian population in more countries, (ii) reviewpsychometric evidences of EQ-5D in local (non-English) journals, (iii) investigate the best way to obtain EQ-5D data from difficult-to-reach groups of participants, such as rural and illiterates. Allattendees felt that this meeting was beneficial for their on-going studies or future study plans.More specifically, the senior EuroQol members who were present all found that the level of the papers presentedwas good and the discussion useful. The EuroQol associates who attended the meeting (beyond the organizing committee; Michael Herdman, Paul Kind and Aureliano Finch) all support a next meeting, as they considered such meeting a timelyinvestment, given the quality of the papers and the dynamics of the area. This second meeting will thus continue the momentum created by the first meeting: to foster sharing of research projects and results, expertise and experience. Collaboration projects being held could also be reported. The format of meeting will be similar to the usual general meeting: started with presentations about the EuroQol Group and the EQ-5D questionnaires, followed by paper discussion and guided poster presentations. Discussions about future plan and collaborations will be held at the end of the meeting. We can expect the prominent experts and researchers that attended the first meeting and the ones who were not able last time will participate, especially when the announcement is made at the earliest time.
