The EQ-5D (3L and 5L) are well-known and widely used generic health status instruments for adults. With the availability of EQ-5D-Y for self-completion in children and adolescents aged between 8–15 years and proxy completion by caregiver for children aged 4–7 years, the recent development of EQ-TIPs (i.e., previously named EQ-TANDI) for 0–3 years old; and an Adapted version of EQ-5D-Y for 2–4 years old which is currently being developed and tested; these age-specific EuroQol instruments yield an opportunity to measure and value HRQoL from infancy, childhood, adolescence and into adulthood and older adulthood. However, there are several challenges, including how to handle the transition between the instruments developed for use at different stages in the life span, particularly for children aged under 5 years old. There are transitions from EQ-TIPs to Y Adapted and from Y Adapted to EQ-5D-Y. In each case, the shift entails both different measurement properties and (potentially) different characteristics of the values. The EQ-TIPs is tailored to measure what aspects of HRQoL matter most for infants and toddlers but its dimensions have a less direct conceptual relationship with the dimensions in youth and adult instruments, which may reduce consistency of how these instruments measure HRQoL across the lifespan. The Y Adapted version for 2-4 year old has the same dimensions as youth and adult instruments but with variations in dimension examples and explanations to improve relevance to 2-4 year olds. Both EQ-TIPs and the Y Adapted version are still in experimental status. Little is currently known on how the descriptions of HRQoL generated from the three EQ instruments compare in children under 5 years old. Similarly, there may be differences in the way HRQoL is measured between youth and adult instruments for adolescents in the age groups where either can be used. Empirical evidence is needed, which will have implications for how to measure and value HRQoL over the lifespan in a coherent way and inform further development of EQ-TIPs and Y Adapted version and valuation methods.  This postdoc fellowship proposal aims to improve understanding of the transition between EuroQol instruments in young children and transition from children to adulthood. I will use existing datasets from Australia and South Africa, to which I have been granted access, and will establish prospective data collection in measuring HRQoL in younger children in China. The following analyses are proposed: (1) compare psychometric performance of EQ-TIPs and Y Adapted version among children aged 2-3 years old, and between EQ-TIPs, Y-3L Adapted, Y-3L original among children aged 4 years old, (2) explore the relationship between the EQ-TANDI profile and the EQ VAS scores in younger children, (3) map EQ-TIPs responses to Y original and Y Adapted response. (4) compare psychometric performance of EQ-5D-Y and adult instrument among young adolescents aged between 13-15 years. This proposed fellowship is two-years-and-9-months part time. The fellowship opportunity will support me to develop expertise on the transition between age-specific measures and values, and insights on instrument development. This will also provide me wider professional engagement and development opportunities and support me in the transition to the next stage of my career.
