Objectives: The EQ-5D has been used to assess health related quality of life (HRQoL) in respiratory conditions including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma. However, the core descriptive system may not be sensitive to all the HRQoL impacts of respiratory conditions. To increase the sensitivity of the descriptive system, two bolt-on questions “Limitations in physical activities due to shortness of breath” and “Breathing problems,” have been developed (EQ-5D-5L+R1 and EQ-5D-5L+R2). Psychometric comparisons are required to understand the performance and sensitivity added by the bolt-ons in comparison to other validated instruments. This is important to inform the work of the EuroQol group in the further development of bolt-ons, and the research agenda around bolt-ons. Therefore, this study tested the psychometric characteristics of the EQ-5D-5L+R using a large dataset collected in Australia. Take-away results: o The results show that adding the respiratory bolt-on to the EQ-5D-5L improved the instrument's descriptive sensitivity in a sample of people with respiratory conditions. o The bolt-on ‘‘breathing problems’’ did not have a high correlation with other dimensions which shows that it is a more independent dimension, than the physical activity limitation bolt-on. The “Limitations in physical activities due to shortness of breath” domain might have an overlap with the other EQ-5D domain “usual activities”, which might cause limited sensitivity of the EQ-5D-5L+R1. o The bolt-on instruments are not suggested to be used as a stand-alone instrument however, they can be used alongside the EQ-5D-5L to estimate so-called ‘‘bolt-on’’ QALYs in addition to the calculation of the standard QALYs to show the potential change in treatment impact when a condition-specific domain is included in the economic evaluation. The choice of bolt-on may be driven by whether overall problems or limitations are being measured. Implications and next steps: o Results suggest a level of validity of the bolt-ons in an Australian population, and therefore to facilitate further use, a value set would be beneficial. The values set can be used alongside the EQ-5D in the economic evaluation of new interventions and treatments for respiratory conditions. However, before using the values to measure QALYs (Quality-adjusted life years), future studies should check the validity and responsiveness of the bolt-ons in different respiratory conditions. o Further research is required to investigate whether the EQ-5D-5L+Rs will be more responsive to changes in the health status of patients longitudinally.
