Introduction The EQ-HWB is a newly developed generic tool designed to assess the effects of health, social care, and caregiving on quality of life. Currently classified as 'experimental,' additional research is urgently required to evaluate its performance within these target populations and across diverse countries and cultural settings. Therefore, an update German translation is needed to support the large-scale EQ DAPHNIE project, which includes Germany, as well as to facilitate additional testing in a key market for EuroQol questionnaires. Methods The translation of the original and modified EQ-HWB for Germany followed the protocol for researcher-led translations established by the Version Management Committee. First, the translation work was conducted based on two independent forward translations from the UK English source version into German. Afterwards, two independent backward translations were conducted from German back to English to identify potential translatability issues. Both after the forward and backward translation, a reconciliation meeting was conducted to harmonise the resulting translations and to discussion any issues that emerged. Consequently, the resulting consensus version was carried forward to a cognitive debriefing exercise, for which respondents were divided into two groups. The groups were structured to ease the cognitive burden during the cognitive debriefing exercise, as both the current (original) and modified self-complete versions were evaluated. In the first group, participants were initially debriefed on the current (original) self-complete version before being asked their preference regarding the modifications. Conversely, the second group reviewed the modified version first and was then asked whether they preferred any elements of the official wording. The cognitive debriefing interviews consisted of seven parts: introduction, demographic background questions, ranking exercise, self-completing the EQ-HWB, debrief of the general impression of the EQ-HWB, detailed cognitive debrief regarding the understanding of each item and, lastly, eliciting the respondents views on the item modifications or their original counter-parts depending on the debrief group. Results The translation work was conducted by four independent translators and a fifth researcher for proofreading the finalised versions. The forward translations were done by two researchers who are German native speakers and fluent in English, whereas the backward translators were English native speakers (one UK English and one US English speaker) and fluent in German. A total of 16 respondents were cognitively debriefed about the German EQ-HWB versions. Respondents were aged between 21 and 83 years with a mean age of 48.5 years including 9 female and 7 male participants. Moreover, 10 respondents had a health condition including ADHD, hypertension, skin cancer, various allergies, polymyalgia rheumatica, autoimmune disease, diabetes, a blood clotting disorder and asthma. Respondents seemed generally confident in ranking the response scales. The few observed problems related to some difficulty differentiating levels 2 and 3 in the difficulty and frequency response scales. The proposed response scale modifications were mostly preferred, since they allowed a clearer response scaling. In general, the German translations worked as intended and there was no item, instruction or response scale identified that was consistently misinterpreted. From the translation phase, there were concerns that translations for the items ‘feel anxious’ and ‘feel unsafe’ may be overlapping, but for both items respondents had a clear understanding of their intended meanings. It became evident from the debriefing that the item ‘feel unsafe’ almost exclusively tapped into physical insecurity or fear of physical harm. Moreover, respondents from the first group were highly aware of the switch from negative to positive items and voiced their concerns over the potential problems this may cause. Consequently, there was much greater endorsement to switch to the modified items. On the other hand, this was not as evident in group 2. Conclusion The EQ-HWB was successfully translated for Germany following the researcher-led translation protocol established by the VMC. Following this translation project four self-complete versions of the EQ-HWB are available in German. This includes the EQ-HWB long form and EQ-HWB-S both in the original and modified version. Translated constructs were easily understood and well perceived by respondents participating in the rigorous cognitive debriefing process. In this regard, the translation protocol for researcher-led translations worked as anticipated providing guidance in conducting the translation and cognitive debriefing for new translations. Overall, the researcher-led translation protocol is a cost-efficient process for generating new language versions in a timely manner.
