Introduction: In EQ-5D valuation studies, health states have by convention beenpresented as a series of five sentences, each describing a health dimension and severity‘level’. Since the introduction of the EQ-5D-5L, the valuationof the descriptive system may have become more challenging. Preference inversions, for example between levels 4 and 5,have been identified in various EQ-5D-5L valuation studies. A solution could be to mimic the way in which patients self-report their own health using the EQ-5D-5L descriptive system, where the ordinal structure of levels 1 to 5 is clear. The aim of this study is to develop and test the feasibility of presenting health states in the ‘context’ of the whole descriptive system, and to understand how this affects valuation data.Methods: A two-arm discrete choice experiment (DCE) study was conducted online (n=993). Respondents were randomly allocated to either the control (standard EQ-VT display), or the ‘context’ arm (health states described in the context of the descriptive system).Each respondent wasrandomly allocated to two of 28 blocks (from the EQ-VT experimental design),and completed14 DCE tasks plus two fixed pairs, chosen to address specific research questions. The survey also includedbackground and feedback questions. Differences across arms wereassessed using regression analyses, and the numbersof correctly ordered coefficients and logically inconsistent responseswere examined. Differences across arms weretested on the pooled dataset.Results and discussion:Presenting health states ‘in context’ is feasible, and we demonstrate that this can significantly reduce the number of respondents selecting logically dominated health states, particularly for the labels ‘severe’ and ‘extreme’(χ²=46.02, p<0.001). Comparing conditional logit modelling results between arms, we find that coefficients are ordered as expected for both arms (apart from the ordering of MO2 and MO3 for the control arm, but this is not statistically significant), but the magnitude of decrements between levels islarger for the context arm, particularly for levels 4 and 5. The likelihood ratio statistic of the restricted pooled model is 42.00, which leads us to reject the null hypothesis of preference homogeneity between the two arms, suggesting that preferences were significantly different between arms. Our results could have implications for valuing EQ-5D states using DCE andother methods such as time trade-off (TTO). It may also haveimplications for the requirement to label each level.
