Background: EQ-5D profile data are often under-analysed, but can yield important insights into levels of and changes in patient and population health. One characteristic is the extent to which they cluster together in a small number of profiles or are dispersed evenly over many profiles. This can have implications for interpreting statistical analysis of the corresponding EQ values (Index)data, and for clinical management of patients.Aims:This paper aims to develop methods for describing observed distributionsof EQ-5D profiles and to explore the properties of the new methods compared with existing ones (e.g. Shannon’s Index). We investigate the methods using both real, from the EnglishNHS, and simulated EQ-5D data, and show how they can be used to generate new insights into, for example, the differences between the three-and five-levelversions of the EQ-5D with respect tohow profile data are clustered. Methods: We report three methods we have developed to characterise and summarise the distribution of health states in patient reported outcome (PRO) data within a sample or population of patients: the Health State Density Index(HSDI), Health State Density Curve(HSDC)and estimated Power Law functions (PLFs).We compare these andexisting methods from information theory (e.g. Shannon’s Index), in examining the distribution of EQ-5D health profilesin three data sets:across three groups of patients in Cambridgeshire Community Services NHS’s electronic patient records for the EQ-5D-5L; the Health Survey for England 2014 for the EQ-5D-3L; andthe NHS PROMs programme for theEQ-5D-3L. The properties of the various methods are further examined using simulated data sets. Results:Each method has different properties and will give different insights into patients’ data. For example, the Shannon index (absolute and relative) is not sensitive to random variations but decreases slowly with “rare health states”. The HSDI decreases slowly with random variations and is strongly affected by “rare” health states with largedecreases towards zero (total inequality).Conclusions:These methods can be used by researchers to better understand the characteristics of EQ-5D profile data. They can also be used by clinicians to understand the degree to which their patients’ needs are homogeneous or characterised by distinct sub-groups, with implications for treatment planning. Finally, the methods can also be used as a way of comparing differences between instruments, such as the 3L and 5L, in measuring health. Acknowledgements and disclaimersThis project was funded by a research grant from the EuroQol Research Foundation. All views expressed are those of the authors, and not necessarily those of the EuroQol Research Foundation.The authors are grateful to Nils Gutacker, Thomas Kohlmann,and participants at the Health Economists’Study Group (HESG) Winter Meeting (Birmingham 2017)and the 34thEuroQol Plenary (Barcelona 2017), and to Nigel Rice, for helpful comments onearlier versionsof this paper.
