Background: Preference heterogeneity in health valuation has become a topic of greater discussion among health technology assessment agencies. To better understand heterogeneity within a national population, valuation studies may identify latent groups that place different absolute and relative importance (i.e., scale and taste parameters) on the attributes of health profiles. Objective: Using discrete choice responses from a Peruvian valuation study, we estimated EQ-5D-5L values on a quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) scale accounting for latent heterogeneity in scale and taste, as well as controlling heteroskedasticity at task level variation. Method: We conducted a series of latent class analyses, each including the 20 main effects of the EQ-5D-5L and a power function that relaxes the constant proportionality assumption (i.e., discounting). Taste class membership was conditional on respondent-specific characteristics as well as their experience with the time trade-off tasks. Scale class membership was conditional on behavioral characteristics such as survey duration and self-stated difficulty level in understanding tasks. Each analysis allowed the scale factor to vary by task type and time (i.e., heteroskedasticity). Results: The results indicate three taste classes: a quality-of-life oriented class (33.35%) that placed the highest value on levels of severity, a length-of-life oriented class (26.72%) that placed the highest value on life span, and a middle class (39.71%) with health attribute effects lower than the quality class and life span effect lower than the length-of-life oriented class. The EQ-5D-5L values ranged from -2.11 to 0.86 (quality-of-life oriented class), from -0.38 to 1.02 (middle class), and from 0.36 to 1.01 (length-of-life oriented class). The likelihood of being a member of the quality-of-life class was highly dependent on whether the respondent completed the time-tradeoff tasks (p-value <0.001). The results also show two scale classes as well as heteroskedasticity within each scale class. Conclusion: Accounting for taste and scale classes simultaneously improves understanding preference heterogeneity in health valuation. Future studies may confirm the differences in taste between classes in terms of the effect of quality of life and life span attributes. Furthermore, confirmatory evidence is needed on how behavioral variables captured within a study protocol may enhance analyses of preference heterogeneity.
