To construct the value set of EQ-5D-5L, the EuroQol Group designed a standardized valuation protocol (the EQ-VT). The experimental design of the EQ-VT includes a set of 86 health states needs to be valued using composite time trade-off (cTTO) method. These 86 health states were selected using a Monte Carlo procedure which was applied to a set of simulated data. It is currently unknow Version 26JAN2017Page 2how the 86 state cTTO design of the EQ-VT performs compared to other possible designs.We have already investigate this issueby using a so-called ‘saturation dataset’, which contains the observed VAS valuesfor all 3,125 health states in EQ-5D-5L. Using this dataset, we tested different design choices(i.e. different subset of health states). We included the subset of current EQ-VT design to see how well they can predict the observed values from the saturation data by computing the Mean absolute error (MAE) for all 3,125 health states. The result showedthe current EQ-VT selection of 86 health states performed well in estimating VAS valuesfor EQ-5D-5L health states. In addition, we found that a small orthogonal design with 25 health states performed also well. This indicates a reduction in design size (i.e. the number of states used for direct valuation/included in the design) is possible, which would increase the feasibility/reduce the burden of doing an EQ-VT study.The results from our work using the saturation data have a limitation in that the results werebased on VAS instead of cTTO.Therefore we plan a 3-arms study to confirm and further investigate our findings incTTO. In this study, we plan to collect cTTO data on two most prominent design choices as found in the VAS study: the orthogonal design with 25 states and the Bayesian design also with 25 states. Further, we will collect cTTO data for the current 86 EQ-VT as one control arm. To make this investigation feasible and less costly, we will collect the data using 500 Chinese students as respondents. The logistics for this study will benefit of the experience of similar logistics employed during the VAS EQ-5D-5L saturation in China. This will assure that the data is collected swiftly and validl
