Introduction EuroQol plans to take EQ-TIPS from its current ‘experimental’ status to launch as an approved version – but this requires establishing robust methods for preference weighting EQ-TIPS data. However, both existing (EQ-VT) and emerging (non-linear DCE methods) methods used by EuroQol to generate anchored values for its instruments are likely to be problematic in eliciting (anchored) values for EQ-TIPS states (Devlin et al., Forthcoming). EuroQol’s YPWG and VWG have therefore identified response mapping between the EQ-TIPS-5L and the EQ-5D-Y-5L as a potential solution. Aim The primary aims of this study are: (a) To explore a range of different mapping approaches between the EQ-TIPS-5L and the EQ-5D-Y-5L, and (b) drawing on an international data set (which is the basis of a separate proposal), to produce a mapping function that can be used internationally to preference weight EQ-TIPS-5L data using local EQ-5D-Y-5L value sets. Data Exploratory methodological work can begin immediately using the Australian Paediatric Multi-Instrument Comparison (P-MIC) study, which includes EQ-TIPS-3L Version 2 (V2) — available only in a 3-level format — alongside adapted and original EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L data. As there are n=140 paired EQ-TIPS-3L (V2) and EQ-5D-Y-3L/5L responses and n=400 paired EQ-TIPS-3L (V2) and EQ-5D-Y-3L/5L adapted responses for children aged 2-4 years all of these pairs will explored in the exploratory work. Although the final mapping will rely on the latest version of EQ-TIPS-5L Version3 (V3), P-MIC provides a valuable foundation for early proof-of-concept and methodological development. Methods tested using P-MIC data (and other, new data as they become available) will be used to develop a final mapping, which will use new international datasets with parallel EQ-TIPS-5L V3 and EQ-5D-Y-5L data from Australia, Canada, and Argentina. [Note: Parallel data collection of the EQ-TIPS and EQ-5D-Y will be coordinated by the EuroQol office and the YPWG; a proposal outlining multiple data collection studies will be submitted separately]. Methods The primary focus will be on estimating and evaluating the performance of models using a range of response mapping techniques—including multinomial logit regression, ordinal logistic regression, and non-parametric approaches—to predict EQ-5D-Y-5L responses from EQ-TIPS-5L responses, allowing Y-5L value sets to be used to preference weight EQ-TIPS-5L. The final dataset will be split into estimation and validation samples. Model selection will primarily be based on predictive accuracy in the validation sample, with additional consideration given to performance across different severity levels. In addition to statistical mapping, we will explore two complementary approaches to support and validate the relationship between EQ-TIPS-5L (V3) and EQ-5D- Y-5L: vignette-based assessment and VAS-based analysis. First, qualitative methods will be used to derive comparative utility estimates by asking clinical experts in paediatrics and early childhood development, alongside caregivers, rate hypothetical child health scenarios described using EQ-TIPS-5L (V3) and EQ-5D-Y-5L descriptors—an approach similar to that used in the Health Utilities Preschool (HUPS) study for mapping to HUI3 utilities (Furlong et al., 2023). Second, Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) data, available in both instruments, will be used to explore descriptive consistency. A descriptive analysis of the EQ-TIPS-5L V3 and EQ-5D-Y-5L profiles that correspond to each of the VAS digit clusters will also be examined, supported by data visualisations. This combination of statistical, qualitative, and descriptive methods will help triangulate the validity of the utility estimates generated through mapping and strengthen the credibility of the resulting value set for EQ-TIPS.
