Background: As populations age, robust measurement of health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in older adults has become increasingly important. Although the EQ-5D-5L is widely used to measure HRQoL, older adults may differ in the relevance of certain domains (e.g., fatigue, relationships, cognition, sensory function) and in how they interpret response options (e.g., due to adaptation with age), potentially undermining the validity of the EQ-5D-5L and risking measurement non-invariance. Although previous research has explored the use of the EQ-5D in elderly populations, most of it has focused on the EQ-5D-3L, not explored the potential added value of bolt-ons, and did not explore differential item functioning (DIF) [1, 2].Aim: To explore the measurement properties of the EQ-5D-5L in older people to identify both its strengths and possible limitations, specifically in terms of (i) informativity, (ii) target constructs (dimensionality) and (iii) item functioning.Methods: We will conduct secondary analyses of two large datasets (total N≈ 31,000 adults ≥18 years old, including N≈7,000 older adults ≥ 65 years old): EQ-DAPHNIE multi-country general-population samples (including multiple HRQoL/well-being instruments, bolt-ons, and anchoring vignettes), and W-MIC population data (including multiple HRQoL/well-being instruments). Analyses will comprise: (i) descriptives and informativity (ceiling/floor, missingness, Shannon’s indices); (ii) dimensional coverage via factor analyses and structural equation models regressing EQ VAS on the five EQ-5D items plus latent non-EQ-5D domains to quantify incremental explanatory value (ΔR²); and (iii) item response theory (IRT) using two-parameter graded response models to assess discrimination, thresholds, information, and DIF. Assessments of DIF will follow an anchor-based multi-group IRT approach in all datasets and, additionally in EQ-DAPHNIE, with HOPIT models using the anchoring vignettes. Prespecified subgroups include age bands, sex, comorbidities, health/social care use.Relevance to the EuroQol Group: The study will map the EQ-5D-5L’s strengths and gaps in older adults, identify candidate dimensions that may improve sensitivity (e.g., fatigue, cognition, sensory function), explore potential issues with composite items (anxiety/depression; pain/discomfort), and provide guidance on relevant bolt-ons. These outputs directly respond to section 3 of chapter 2 (DSWG) of the 20th RFP calling for secondary data analyses to explore the measurement issues relating to the measurement of HRQoL in older populations. The included datasets were explicitly selected to meet the call’s preference for datasets that include HRQoL dimensions considered in the Bolt-on Toolbox. Furthermore, the project is aligned with EuroQol’s strategic objectives 14 and 20 about research on elderly populations.  Deliverables will include 1-2 open-access manuscripts, conference presentations, and openly shared R code.
