There has been rapid progress in validating the experimental version of the Y-5L and producing the Y-3L values sets worldwide. For Y-5L, it is in experimental stage and requires more psychometric evidence to move it to the next stage. In the penultimate (14th) round of RFP, the YPWG was calling for proposals to assess the psychometric evidence of these two instruments in different health condition groups and different modes of administration, like self-complete, interviewer-administered (IA) and proxy versions, with an emphasis on research in younger aged group (<8 years). In the last (15th) round of RFP, the YPWG simulates prioritized data collection of the 3L and 5L version of the EQ-5D-Y in children with a high burden of disease. In this resubmission proposal for the penultimate (14th) round of RFP, we have included parallel 3L and 5L data collection, in accordance with the requests made in the last (15th) round of RFP. We will include inpatients with sufficient disease burden and a sample size of 120 dyads (patients and caregivers) for each of following 3 disease groups (n=120 for each group): • Pneumonia: 50% severe pneumonia. • Paediatric central nervous system (CNS) solid tumour: Neuroblastoma or Wilms tumour: 33% category 1, 33% category 2a and 2b; 33% category 3 and 4 and beyond. • Immune thrombocytopenic purpura, ITP, with 33% mild, 33% moderate and 33% sever.  Notably, the cross-sectional data collection at baseline of this project will be covered by another proposal entitled ‘Extending the crosswalk dataset for EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L: proposal to fund multiple new inputs’ (1721-RA, revise and resubmit). As we collect patients mainly administered as inpatient at the hospital with high burden, this data set will be valuable for the cross-walk exercise as prioritise in the (15th) round of RFP, and will help to get good evidence for the psychometrics like responsiveness as requested in the second last (14th) round of RFP.  We will share our 3LY 5LY parallel data with the 1721-RA team as soon as the first cross sectional data from the baseline observations are available. As our research group is an established clinically group, we have direct access to the patient data, and the suggested deadline for the crosswalk data collection of Q3 2024 is feasible. The budget of the cross-sectional data collection at baseline will be covered by 1721-RA and this proposal only ask the budget for conducting the follow-up survey.
