Background: Cancer care and treatment are often responsible for high healthcare spending worldwide, with substantial impact on health-related quality of life (HRQoL) both due to disease symptoms and treatment side-effects. Although the EQ-5D is often used in cancer research, it has often been criticized as being too generic. A recent qualitative study (Gibson et al 2024) examining the content validity of preference-based measures in cancer (including EQ-5D-5L) concludes that cancer-specific measures have better relevancy than generic measures. Gibson et al (2024) also points to a dearth of qualitative work addressing the content validity of the EQ-5D-5L for cancer patients. The “bolt-on” approach identifies particular dimensions/domains which are missing from EQ-5D (for specific populations of interest) and, given sufficient evidence of measurement properties, adds these dimensions (items) to the core EQ-5D. This approach may improve the EQ-5D’s relevance for cancer patients. An existing research relationship with the comprehensive cancer centers (CCC) and the and the Urology department at Universitätsklinikum Tübingen (UKT) presents an opportunity to study the HRQoL of patients with urological cancer. We therefore propose to advance content validity of the EQ-5D-5L and investigate whether a set of bolt-ons can improve its content validity for (urological) cancer patients.The aims of the study include:Examine the content validity of EQ-5D-5L plus bolt-ons for metastatic bladder, prostate and kidney cancer patients, Field test a final short set of bolt-on items MethodsThe project will be cross-sectional qualitative and will include three phases:translation/adaptation,content validity examination with cancer patients (main phase), andfield testing EQ-5D-5L pus a small set of cancer-relevant bolt-ons.Forward-Backward translation plus cognitive debriefing will be used in Phase 1 to translate all toolbox bolt-ons and a set of selected non-toolbox bolt-ons that have not yet been translated into German (Germany). Phase 2 will sample 30 metastatic bladder, prostate and kidney cancer patients, 5-7 family caregivers, and 7-13 formal caregivers (clinicians) from the Conservative Uro-oncology clinic at UKT. Patients and family caregivers will be recruited for semi-structured interviews and formal caregivers will be recruited for focus groups. Both interviews and focus groups will investigate the content validity (Relevance, comprehensiveness, comprehensibility) of the core EQ-5D-5L, toolbox and non-toolbox bolt-ons. Relevant bolt-ons will be identified using an iterative approach: (1) all toolbox plus three selected non-toolbox bolt-ons will be investigated in an initial step; (2) after 10 interviews, bolt-ons with poor relevance will be removed from the interviews and additional relevant dimensions identified by patients will be added; (3) the bolt-on set will be reassessed again after 20 interviews. In Phase 3, we will field test the final set of bolt-ons (along with the core EQ-5D-5L) with 8-10 urological cancer patients (recruited from the Uro-oncology clinic at UKT). The interviews and focus groups will be analyzed using thematic content analysis guided by an a priori framework: namely the COSMIN content validity checklist. This approach will enable specific categories to be extracted from the material, and underlying themes and meanings to be identified. Relevance for the EuroQol groupContent validity of a measurement instrument is considered the most important type of validity because it affects all other types of validities. For development of bolt-ons, it is crucial for the EuroQol group to establish content validity in various patient populations. Cancer patients is a crucial patient population and strategically important for the EuroQol Group due to the rapid development of treatments for this population. This study will both provide content validity evidence for the core EQ-5D-5L as well as identify relevant bolt-on dimensions for a particular (urological) cancer population.
