(Note: This project has been discussed by email between the VMC (Sarah and Jennifer) and Elly and Bernhard. The project is being entered in to the portal so their is a project number allocated to it ad a budget stated for the external researchers and advisors to invoice against). The VMC wish to explore the use of gender-neutral terms in PROMS generally and in the EuroQol instruments in particular and is thus seeking funding to undertake this work. At the 2021 Strategic Planning Meeting the VMC agreed in principle that one of the roles of the Committee is to ensure that the EuroQol instruments are as inclusive as possible. In recent years there has been an increasing realization that gendered language may alienate certain respondents and may exclude some groups from participating in surveys. However, before the VMC proceeds to alter existing wording or introduce new phrases, there needs to be a strong theoretical foundation upon which to make these changes. The need for this strong foundation has become evident with each of our VMC/RWS meetings where the complexity associated with gender neutrality is evident. This proposal is requesting support for external-to-VMC expertise to undertake a scoping review with VMC members. Specifically: 1) For a researcher (external to the VMC) to lead a scoping review of published literature to identify, describe and understand the strategies used by others in addressing gender inclusiveness/neutrality in questionnaires 2) Engage advisors to provide specialist advice. We would like at least one advisor to come from the LGBTQIA+ (Rainbow) community to help ensure findings are interpreted in a non-discriminatory manner and one advisor from a region where there may be cultural/policy challenges to the use of gender neutral/inclusive language. Apart from providing the VMC with a theoretical foundation on which to base any further action on this topic, the project will deliver: A paper prepared for submission to a peer-reviewed journal, a survey of EuroQol members, and a report to the VMC and Executive.
