Background: Cancer remains a leading cause of morbidity and mortality globally, with patients facing significant long-term physical, psychological, and social challenges. The EORTC QLQ-C30 and the EQ-5D-5L are widely used tools to assess health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in oncology. However, the EQ-5D-5L, though validated for cancer populations, may not fully capture cancer-specific symptoms or treatment-related side effects. The EuroQol Group has introduced the Bolt-on Toolbox, which includes additional dimensions like cognition and fatigue, which may address the limitations of the EQ-5D-5L to measure HRQoL in oncology. Study aims: This study aims to evaluate the psychometric performance of the EQ-5D-5L and Bolt-on Toolbox items and other bolt-on items in two distinct oncology populations: sarcoma and colorectal cancer patients. Specifically, it will assess the validity and responsiveness of the EQ-5D-5L, EQ-5D-5L with bolt-ons, and EORTC QLQ-C30. The study will also compare HRQoL scores across these instruments and identify demographic, clinical, and psychosocial factors associated with lower HRQoL.Proposed methods: We will recruit at least 600 patients (300 from each cancer type) from the UK, Australia, and the Netherlands. Participants will complete a series of validated HRQoL instruments at two time points, six months apart. Data will be analyzed to evaluate psychometric properties, including convergent and divergent validity, dimensionality, and responsiveness. Gains of the proposed research: The proposed research directly contributes to the goals of the EuroQol funding call by providing empirical evidence on the validity and responsiveness of the EQ-5D-5L bolt-ons, with a specific focus on cognition, fatigue, and potentially other relevant dimensions for cancer patients. The international scope, and focus on rare and common cancer populations ensure that it aligns well with the objectives of the EuroQol Bolt-on Toolbox Initiative, supporting the development of a more comprehensive and sensitive EQ-5D-5L for diverse patient populations.
