Background: The English NHS has been collecting EQ-5D data for all publicly-fundedpatients undergoing four types of elective surgery since April 2009. One of the intended aims ofthese data is to inform patients’ choice of hospital. To this end NHS Digital publishes hospitalperformance indicators reflecting the change in EQ-5D utility scores. These are calculated usingthe UK TTO general population value set.While the approach of using general population value sets is justified in many applications,for example when evaluating new technologies for adoption into collectively funded healthcaresystems, it appears indefensible when HRQoL data are used to inform individual patients’decisions about where to receive care. Instead the weights should reflect patients’ individualpreferences, or if this is infeasible a close approximation thereof based on samples of patientswith similar characteristics.Aims: This study explores whether using weights derived from previous patients instead ofgeneral population weights leads to a) different rankings of hospital providers and b) changes inproviders deemed positive or negative performance outliers; both of which might arguably affectprospective patients’ choice of hospital.Methods: We use EQ-5D health state data and EQ-VAS data from over 190,000 patientswho underwent hip and knee replacement surgery in England between April 2012 and March2015 to derive procedure-specific patient population tariffs. We test for i) internal consistency,ii) model fit and iii) predictive performance (root mean squared error) in an external sample ofpatients (April 2015 to March 2016). We apply these tariffs to the EQ-5D health state databefore and after surgery to calculate case-mix adjusted hospital performance estimates. Changesin hospital ranking are calculated for each patient for their five closest hospitals. Changes inoutlier status are calculated for all providers in England. We also test for patient heterogeneityin valuations using latent class modelling.Results: Patient population VAS tariffs assign lower decrements to pain & discomfort andhigher decrements to anxiety & depression than the UK general population TTO tariff. The preferred patient tariff structure differs across conditions but includes additional level 2 and 3interactions compared to the basic MVH-A1 specification. We find coefficient estimates to berelatively stable over time.Hospital rankings vary depending on the weights used and a smaller number of providersare identified as being positive outliers when patient weights rather than general populationvalues are used. Moreover, a significant proportion of patients has no well performing hospital(as identified by change in EQ-5D index score) in their local vicinity.Latent class analysis identifies up to four latent types of patients with significantly differentvalue functions. Group membership is associated with observable characteristics, such as age,gender, relative deprivation, and symptom duration.Conclusion: Patients may be better served with hospital performance estimates that reflecttheir own values and are therefore more relevant to their decisions. This finding has importantimplications for the national PROM programme in England.
