Background:Some studies depict the relationships between self-reported health socio-demographic factors and clinical conditions in the general population. The relationship between self-reported health with broader life domains, like the perception of law and order, corruption, civic engagement, and others has been less studied. In Latin America and the Caribbean, notably, there have been very few studies looking into these issues. The Gallup World Poll is a survey conducted periodically in more than 160 countries around the world. In the 2007 and 2008 version, the poll included 130 countries (20 from LAC) and self-reported health using EQ-5D-3L instrument. Clustering is a term used to refer to a setoftechniques that find subgroups in a data set, such that observations within each subgroup are as similar to each other as possible and as different as possible to observations in other subgroups. “Similarity” between observation is determined by the selection of a similarity/dissimilarity measure. The choice of the appropriate measure is made based on the type of data and knowledge of the data being analyzed. After choosing the dissimilarity measure, the clustering algorithm must be selected. For our study, we chose partitioning algorithms which include the K-means clustering algorithm and the Partitioning Around Medoids (PAM) algorithm. In PAM clustering, each cluster is associated with a medoid, the object with the smallest dissimilarity to all other objects in the cluster, and is named after it. Objectives:a) Sociodemographic segmentation: Find subgroups of respondents determined by patterns of sociodemographic variables and assess if belonging to such subgroups predicts a difference in the EQ-VAS score.b) EQ-5D segmentation: Find subgroups determined by response to all items of EuroQol combined with age, education and income.Methods:The Gallup World Poll is a Survey conducted in over 150 countries, with randomly selected, nationally representative adult samples using a set of core questions. Most items havea dichotomous response set and are organized into22indexes.Survey samples are nationally representative of adults over 15 years old. Survey data is weighted to account for sampling, design effects, and margin of error.We eliminated cases not corresponding to one of the following Latin-Americancountries. 1. Argentina2. Belize3. Bolivia4. Brazil 5. Chile6. Colombia7. Costa Rica8. Dominican Republic9. Ecuador10. El Salvador11. Guatemala12. Guyana13. Honduras14. Mexico15. Nicaragua16. Panama17. Paraguay18. Peru19. Trinidad and Tobago20. Uruguay21. VenezuelaWe chose to work with the R statistical package and to limit the amount of computing power necessary for clustering algorithms, we chose to work with data for the year 2008. We created two datasets, one for each previously specified objective. For sociodemographic segmentation, we used the22indexes that summarize information from different domains, and we created a dissimilarity matrix using Euclidean distance, given that all variables were numeric. For EQ-5D segmentation we used the following variables:• Household Income per capita (International Dollars) • Age• Own Health Today –Visual analog scale coded as a continuous variable with a range from 0 to 10. • Mobility• Self-Care• Usual activities• Pain/Discomfort• Anxiety/Depression• EducationSince the data included numeric and categorical variables, we generated a dissimilarity matrix using Gower distance.We later implemented a PAM algorithm, accounting for weighted observations for both objectives. We used weightedaverage Silhouette to determine the best way to cluster the data. This process was applied to both distance matrices. In both cases, a range of 2 to 10 clusters was explored. Once every observation was assigned to a cluster through the described methods,we assessed whether belonging to a specific cluster predicted a change in EQ-5D-VAS score through linear regression. We included the EQ-5D-VAS as an outcome variable, cluster as a categorical variable and age and education as covariables.Results:After selecting the variables to be analyzed and restricting the observations to those recorded in 2008, both datasets had 18,609 observations from 19 (Belize and Guyana were not included in 2008).For sociodemographic segmentation, average Silhouette was highestfor two clusters. Clustering produced clusters 7365and 18131. Cluster 18131concentrated 32,07% of observations and had better(statistically significant) values in all indicators included in the analysis. These clusters were significantly associated with a difference in the value of self-rated health on EuroQol. Belonging to cluster 18131was associated with an average increaseof 0.8994points in the EQ-VAS 0-10 scale, holdingsex,education and age constant, compared to belonging to cluster 7365.Using the criteria of the highest average Silhouette, we selected 8clusters as the best way to group the data for the EQ-5D-Based segmentation. Four clusters were predominantly male and four were predominantly female respondents. Clusters 15706 and 2016 gathered most of the respondents with no problems in any of the five domains and had the higher VAS score in males and females, respectively.We found a group of predominantly males with high EQ-VAS score that reported moderate anxiety depression.Discussion:In our study we explored different segmentation tools in a large Data set that includes data of self-reported health and other aspects from 19 LAC countries. These tools are increasingly used in healthcare to tailor clinical and public health interventions to heterogeneous populations In our first analysis, we showed thataclustering algorithm was able to identify a subgroup of observations defined by favorable values in the Index variables, andthatthese observations also correlated with higher values in the EQ-VAS. In our second analysis, we identifiedinteresting patterns defined by the five domains and VAS score of the EQ-5Daccording to sex. Our findings show that clustering analyses arenot only useful but are also versatile techniquesthat can be applied to the study of health-related quality of life and help to untangle the differences that lie within different cultural and social subgroups.
