Health economic analyses and cost effectiveness models often employ health state utility values sourced from publications, wherein EQ-5D values are often reported with marginal statistics (mean, SD/SE) only. As such analyses are usually designed to fit within specific country settings, utility values should ideally be derived using a relevant value set. When sourced from publications, the reported values typically only reflect a single value set, and changing aggregate statistics from one value set to another would normally require access to individual level patient data (IPD). In the absence of IPD access, analyses and models are frequently populated with values reflecting several different value sets, most of which will not be relevant for the setting they are used. We have developed a promising proof-of-concept algorithm that allows estimation of mean values from any desired value set based on reported mean values from a known value set, including transportation between reported -3L and desired -5L value sets. The algorithm produces remarkably good estimates in small-scale testing using the multi-instrument comparison study dataset, but has not yet been tested in e.g. clinical trial data or observational study datasets. This proposed project aims to develop, refine, and formally validate the existing proof-of-concept method to transport aggregated EQ-5D utility values across value sets when IPD is not accessible. The project is structured as three relatively independent subprojects. Subproject 1 bring the crudely developed proof-of-concept code from functional sketch stage to a fully CRAN-compliant R package with a user friendly web front-end. The existing code allows, by a relatively complex procedure, transportation based on reported mean and reported value set to any other value set. The desired code will make this process simple and optionally allow inclusion of reported variance / uncertainty, to allow transportation including uncertainty. Subproject 2 we will engage pharmaceutical companies to identify relevant clinical trials; extract random subsamples of participants (60%-90% of the full samples), extract EQ-5D data, treatment allocation , timing of measurement, and broadly defined clinical group. The idea is to have a dataset of real data covering a wide range of clinical settings without allowing identification of which trials the data stems from. If successful, a publication is planned describing the collaborative dataset, which will be made publicly available. In parallel, we aim to collect a large number of patient subgroup-specific observational datasets including EQ-5D data, as such datasets are frequently used to publish mean utility values.Subproject 3 involves formal testing and validation of the utility transportation procedure. Briefly, as all the collected datasets include self-reported EQ-5D (either -3L or -5L), we can calculate “true” utility values using all available value sets. We can then, from each “true” value use the transportation procedure to produce estimates of all not-used value sets. These estimates can then be compared with the “true” values to determine the expected precision of the procedure, broken down by starting (reported) value set, target value set, and patient/disease group.
