Introduction: The growing variety of Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) measures and value sets calls for methods and tools to assess which alternative is most sensitive to change in a particular target population. We introduce the valueSetCompare R package, which facilitates theoretical and empirical comparisons across different measures and value sets. We validate this tool with two case studies: (1) comparing EQ-5D-3L and EQ-5D-5L value sets across 15 countries, and (2) assessing EQ-5D-5L, SF-6D, and HUI3 value sets in the United States. Methods: The valueSetCompare package allows theorical and empirical comparisons of value sets. Empirical comparisons require cross-sectional data incorporating utility scores from two or more different measures, and an independent severity variable. The package introduces a novel empirical methodology to assess the sensitivity of value sets to changes in health severity. To do so, a large number of simulated datasets are generated using resampling where the likelihood of sampling is a function of the severity proxy score. Mean scores and confidence bands along the severity for each instrument are presented in a ribbon plot. Results: In the first case study, we observed substantial differences between 3L and 5L value sets. Generally, 5L sets demonstrated smaller utility differences between health states, enhanced sensitivity to severity changes, and stronger interval measurement properties. In the second case study, the EQ-5D-5L and HUI3 demonstrated better responsiveness to severity variations compared to SF-6D. However, no significant differences in discriminative power were found among the three instruments. Conclusion: The valueSetCompare package offers a standardized and flexible framework for comparing HRQoL value sets, allowing for intuitive graphical representation of the sensitivity of different instruments, as well as standardized statistical tests. The package promotes transparency and rigor in the selection of the best-suited value set to capture treatment effects in populations of interest.
