Background: Since publication of the EQ-5D-Y valuation protocol (Ramos-Goni et al 2020), there has been considerable interest in undertaking valuation studies and rapid progress toward producing value sets. So far, more than 10 studies have completed data collection, and several others are on their way. As the EQ-5D-Y valuation protocol that is currently used may not be the final version, this first wave of studies may provide us with a wealth of information on various aspects of values for EQ-5D-Y-3L states, as well as on how respondents value these states. Furthermore, the availability of these value sets allows for a comparison of values for the EQ-5D-Y-3L instrument and for those of adults. Aims: This study has three aims: 1) conducting a comparative analysis of EQ-5D-Y value sets, 2) conducting a comparative analysis of EQ-5D-Y respondent-level valuation data, and 3) comparing EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-5L value sets.  Methods: A comparative analysis of value sets will be undertaken, in which the EQ-5D-Y-3L value sets of at least 10 countries are extracted from their respective manuscripts. Following a similar methodology of previously published work by Olsen et al (2018) and Roudijk et al (2022), we will compare how EQ-5D-Y-3L value sets may differ between countries, and additionally, whether these differences may relate to methodological choices made in these studies. For the comparative analysis of valuation data, PI’s of valuation studies will be contacted and asked to collaborate. In each dataset, preferences will be explored using latent class models, and it is tested whether similar latent classes exist between countries. Furthermore, the agreement between the cTTO and DCE data is tested within countries. Lastly, for the comparison of youth and adult value sets, we will focus on ordinal information that can be extracted from the respective EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-5L value sets. For each country included, we will compare characteristics such as scale length, relative importance of the 5 dimensions, percentage of negative states. Furthermore, we will compare the values directly, and provide illustrative examples of how values may differ when transitioning between the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-5L instrument. Relevance: The three proposed studies may help us better understand how values for EQ-5D-Y-3L health states differ between countries, how respondents may differ in their responses between countries, and whether the two valuation methods agree within countries. Furthermore, these studies will provide information on the transition between youth and adult value sets. This is all relevant for potential future valuation protocol updates, and may also be informative for researchers that want to value EQ-5D-Y-5L in the future once it gains beta status.
