Background: Few HRQoL instruments for children use ‘strengths based’ language but recently the ICECAP-CYS has been launched with strengths-based language having been heavily developed with consumers, parents and children which could pose a market-threat to the EQ-5D-Y-5L. The EQ-5D-Y-5L has recently launched after considerable EuroQol investment and was adapted from the adult instrument with limited consumer ‘co-design’ input. Like many HRQoL instruments it relies self or proxy reporting concerns and problems. This can be challenging for the inclusion of some children (and their families), such as those with children with severe conditions or complex disabilities that are not expected to cure or improve. A deficits focus can threaten child participant’s self-esteem and produce ethical concerns. There are several paediatric HRQoL measures that use positively worded language (e.g. KIDSCREEN and KINDL-R- which are non-preference weighted, and ICECAP-CYP which is preference weighted). There is a key opportunity to explore whether strengths-based adaptations are needed from the perspective of consumers and whether potential threats to the EQ-5D-Y-5L market exist. If a need is identified then any adaptations could be co-designed with patients/families to work in with existing EuroQol projects such as 1) changes to self-report/proxy recommendations for some children, 2) a deep dive on one or more EQ-5D-Y-5L items using strengths-based language, 3) one or more strengths-based bolt-ons to sit alongside existing EQ-5D-Y-5L items and/or 4) mapping for one or more EQ-5D-Y-5L dimensions using alternative strengths based language. There is a pressing and strong ethical imperative and opportunity to position the EuroQol as a global leader in inclusive research practices securing its market positioning. Recent, and ongoing investments in the EQ-5D-Y-5L make this a strategic priority.  Aims: (a) To qualitatively explore the views and experiences of parents and young people regarding current item wording of the EQ-5D-Y-5L and perceived item-level needs (if any) for alternative strengths-based wording. (b) To understand paediatric and disability expert views on wording including for which items, paediatric populations and settings strengths-based adaptations may confer inclusive advantages including which children may be at-risk of harm through self-report using current wording. (c) To feedback information to EuroQol to inform strategic positioning of the EQ-5D-Y-5L in the market and inform whether future developments/enhancements are needed, and what consumers’ direction indicates for partnering with EuorQol work streams (e.g. DeepDive, Bolt-ons). This qualitative project would, together with patients and families, set the desired direction for such research if it was deemed necessary.  Methods: To explore the views and experiences of parents and young people, 3 online focus groups will be conducted in Australia with each of the following groups: parents of children with life limiting conditions or complex disabilities, and adolescents with life limiting conditions or complex disabilities. Participants will be recruited from The Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne and not-for-profit organisations representing rare childhood conditions. Additional interviews will be conducted with 6 paediatric experts (from clinicians, psychologists, disability experts, allied practitioners, or developmental/education specialists) to determine their views. Qualitative data will be coded and thematically analysed. We aim to understand whether EQ-5D-Y-5L strengths-based adaptions are required from a consumer perspective, which dimensions (if any) from the EQ-5D-Y-5L require a strengths-based approaches, and if so how development of a new version could progress (e.g. changes to recommended child self-report, deep dive, bolt-on, mapping to one or more dimensions).  Deliverables: A draft manuscript will be produced reporting qualitative findings along with a presentation prepared for a EuroQol audience to inform the development of future strategy around market position and need for future research for the EQ-5D-Y-5L in regard to strengths-based positioning. *Note that the intention of this project is NOT to produce or position for a new instrument or research program. The intention is to collaborate with consumers to understand whether further strengths-based research is needed for the EQ-5D-Y-5L and how to position this for partnering with existing EuroQol work streams.
