Background:Retrospective assessment of pre-injury health-related quality of life (HRQL) is frequently used to measurechange from pre- to post-injury HRQL. However, retrospective measurement may be confounded by recall bias. It isassumed that presence of recall bias is influenced by several factors, such as the measurement scale or the instrumentthat is used, the measurement schedule, and the presence of a substantial health event during the follow up period.This study empirically tests these assumptions by comparing pre-injury EQ-5D summary scores, EQ-5D profiles andvisual analogue scale (EQ-VAS) scores of trauma patients, as recorded 1 week and 12 months post-injury, respectively.Methods:A sample of 5371 adult trauma patients who attended the Emergency Department (ED) followed by hospitaladmission, received postal questionnaires 1 week (T1) and 12 months (T2) post-injury. The questionnaires contained itemson pre-injury health, in terms of EQ-5D3L and EQ-VAS.Results:Onethousandonehundredsixty-sixcompleteddatapairs with T1 and T2 pre-injury data were available. Meanpre-injury EQ-5D summary scores were 0.906 (T1) and 0.905 (T2), respectively, with moderate intertemporal agreement(intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) T1T2 = 0.595). In absolute terms, 442 (37.9%) respondents reported adifferent pre-injury EQ-5D profile at T2 compared to T1. The least stable EQ-5D dimension was pain/discomfort (20.2% reported a change). Mean T2 pre-injury EQ-VAS score was significantly higher than meanT1 pre-injury EQ-VAS score (T2 84.6 versus T1 83.3). Multivariable logistic regression analysis indicated thatlower educational level, comorbiddisease and having PTSD symptoms were independent predictors ofchange of pre-injury EQ-5D profile.Conclusions:Despite one third of respondents reported a different pre-injury health level, if asked for on twointerview occasions separated by 1 year, on the group level this difference was nil (EQ-5D summary score) to small (EQ-VAS). The consistent symmetrical pattern of change suggests random error to play the largest role. Intertemporal reliabilitywas the same in EQ-5D profiles vs. EQ-VAS scores, ruling out scale effects. Particularly certain trauma subgroupsshowed highest distortion. While group comparisons may be trusted, in pre-post analysis and repeated measure analysisthe individual injury impact and recovery pattern may be wrongly estimated.Keywords:Health-related quality of life, EQ-5D, Recall bias, Trauma population
