Background and aim: The EQ-5D-5L is a generic instrument used to describe and value health across a wide range of diseases. The EQ-5D-5L descriptive system includes five dimensions (Mobility, Self-Care, Usual activities, Pain / Discomfort and Anxiety/Depression), and has five response levels: no problems, slight problems, moderate problems, severe problems, unable to/extreme problems (1). The addition of other health dimensions to the EQ-5D-5L, referred to as Bolt-ons, has been explored by several studies as an opportunity to enhance the sensitivity of the EQ-5D-5L in capturing aspects of health quality of life that may otherwise be missed in some populations (2). The systematic development and assessment of Bolt-ons, including their translation to other languages, is crucial for their broader application in research. The Post-COVID Network Netherlands (PCNN) is a collaborative initiative involving patients, scientists, healthcare professionals, and community partners. Its goal is to align scientific research and patient care for individuals affected by post-COVID condition (3). The PCNN patient portal, with over 15,000 registered patients, offers a valuable opportunity to collect longitudinal health data, including patient-reported outcome measures such as the EQ-5D-5L and bolt-ons. However, to include such bolt-ons in the portal, approved Dutch translations are first needed, most of which are not yet available. The aim of this proposal is to conduct a research-led translation of a selected set of Post-COVID relevant bolt-ons, from English to Dutch language. This includes a total of 22 items: 4 “best available” bolt-ons: Breathing problems, Fatigue, Sleep, and Cognition, and 18 “Exploratory items”:  1 Breathing item, 7 Cognition items, 9 Fatigue items, and 1 sleep item (see Appendix 1). Methods: The translation process will follow EuroQol’s Version Management Control (VMC) translation guidelines (4) and include the following steps:Two forward translations (English to Dutch) led by two independent translators (BE, DK) fluent in both English and Dutch. Followed by a discussion and merging of translations, and the production of a report. Review of the report by the research team and VMC representatives, followed by the production of a first consensus version.Two backward translations (Dutch to English) of the first consensus version led by two independent translators (SY, BB) fluent in both English and Dutch. Followed by a discussion and the production of a report. Review of the report by the research team and VMC, followed by a second consensus version.Cognitive debriefing interviews. A total of eight native Dutch speaking individuals (patients from PCNN and healthy individuals), will be recruited and interviewed by an experienced qualitative interviewer (MB). Data from the interviews will then be summarized and presented in a report. Review of report by VMC, followed by a third consensus version. Results: A final product in the form of a report with the final versions.Value to the EuroQol working groups: We anticipate that this project will provide substantial value to the EuroQol Research Foundation, as the development of bolt-ons is a priority within the EuroQol's strategic agenda (2024–2028). Moreover, translation of these bolt-ons will enable their application and assessment across multiple disease populations, as most items are generic rather than condition-specific. This initiative also supports EuroQol’s broader objective of developing the Bolt-on Toolbox®, which will include bolt-ons with certified VMC translations for research use.
