Background: The EQ-VT studies, consisting of composite time trade-off and latent scale DCE, are both time consuming and costly. DCE with duration (DCEd) is a promising alternative that allows the values to be anchored on a QALY scale while circumventing both monetary and time constraints of the EQ-VT. However, while it is likely that in many cases, an online study would be a feasible mode of administration (MOA) to conduct DCEd studies, this may not be the case in some settings. Furthermore, previous experiences with online data collections have sometimes shown issues with data quality, and it would be useful to investigate whether this problem persists in face-to-face valuations as well. In addition, it is well-known from the EQ-VT protocol that interviewer-based datacollections may have their own problems as well. The effect of different MOAs on study outcomes (e.g., interview-based, unsupervised virtual classroom setting and unsupervised online survey) and quality control measures associated with each MOA therefore have not been sufficiently studied, while this is necessary research for the further development of the DCEd protocol.Objectives: In this project, we have two main aims. First, we will conduct a study to compare the difference between three MOAs (i.e., interview-based, unsupervised virtual classroom setting and unsupervised online survey) in DCEd across key metrics. Second, we will explore the development of quality control measures for DCEd studies collected using the interviewer-administered MOA.Methods: We will conduct a DCEd study with three different MOA using EQ-5D-5L in the Netherlands. We will recruit 1500 adults from the general population in the Netherlands (i.e., 500 respondent per arm of MOA). Each respondent will complete 15 split-triplet choice tasks (designed using time-preference-corrected (TPC) QALY-design software), and an additional 8 pairwise comparison tasks to improve the identification of the discount rate and anchoring. The data collected via the three different MOAs are then compared on key characteristics such as choice consistency and garbage class size. The data are modelled using mixed logit models with exponential discount rates. Agreement between estimates is compared using Lin's Concordance Coefficient and Bland-Altman plots. Several (meta)data characteristics are tested on whether they can inform data quality in the interview-based data collection.
