Aims Many existing generic health measures were originally based on conceptual frameworks that originated in high income countries and many (though not all) were originally developed for adults. There is little documentation of how health is perceived by children and adolescents in low-income countries (LICs) particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. This study aimed to investigate how health is understood by children and adolescents in Malawi, develop a conceptual framework of child health in Malawi, and compare its content with that of the EQ-5D-Y. Methods We invited children and adolescents (aged 8-17years) from Blantyre, Malawi to take part in four focus group discussions (FGD) between December 2019-February 2020. Consent and assent were obtained from both parents and children before discussions. Each FGD was conducted using a standard topic guide, though prompt questions allowed individual ideas to be pursued. Data was audio recorded and transcribed verbatim in English before being analyzed by open and selective coding to identify concepts and sub-concepts of the conceptual framework. Results We recruited 37 participants (21 female; 16 male; mean age 10.4years). Qualitative analysis produced nine initial domains. Subsequent rounds of analysis refined this into a conceptual framework with seven domains: existence/functionality, self-care, strength/energy, peace of mind, absence of illness, God-given, and acceptance of illness. Four of these (existence/functionality, self-care, peace of mind and mobility) showed similarity with domains from the EQ-5D-Y (usual activities, self-care, anxiety/depression and mobility respectively). There was no equivalent in the Malawi conceptual framework to the EQ-5D-Y domain of pain. Three domains (God-given, strength/energy, acceptance of illness) were unique to the Malawi context. Conclusion A new conceptual framework of health developed among children and adolescents in Malawi has been developed including seven domains. There is some overlap with domains found in the EQ-5D-Y, though not all EQ-5D-Y domains are represented in the Malawi conceptual framework and three domains are unique to the Malawi context. The EQ-5D-Y is a valid utility instrument for use in economic evaluation but may lack content validity in LICs such as Malawi.
