Currently, health technology assessment plays an important role in public health policy decision-making in Thailand, particularly in the process of policy decisions related to adding drugs to the National List of Essential Medicines by the Subcommittee on the National List of Essential Medicines, as well as decisions on adding diagnostic or treatment procedures to the benefit package for patients under the National Health Security scheme, overseen by the National Health Security Office (NHSO). This is due to budget constraints and the need to ensure fairness in access to public healthcare services. Cost-utility analysis is the recommended method for evaluating the economic value of public health interventions in Thailand. This requires utility data to calculate Quality-Adjusted Life Years (QALYs), and the EQ-5D tool is recommended for utility assessments in Thailand. Although Thailand has an established value set for the EQ-5D tool, it is based on adult data and cannot be applied to children, as studies from other countries have shown that using adult value sets for children results in inaccurate utility values. This study aims to develop a utility value set for Thai children aged 8-15 using the EQ-5D-Y tool, which has been specifically developed for measuring utility values in children. This study will be conducted according to the International Valuation Protocol of EuroQol by randomly surveying the adult Thai population, who will act as representatives for children aged 8-15 years. This approach is due to ethical concerns that certain questions, such as those related to death or experiencing pain worse than death, may not be appropriate to ask children directly. The study will be divided into three parts. The study will consist of three parts: 1. An onsite survey of 1,400 Thai participants using the discrete choice experiment method to determine the weight between the five dimensions of the EQ-5D-Y tool. 2. A face-to-face interview of 280 Thai participants to find utility values for each health status using the composite time-trade-off method. 3. Mapping the results from both surveys to establish the utility weight (value set). The data collection tools will be supported by EuroQol, including EQ-VT, EQ-5D-Y, and their translation into Thai. In addition, EuroQol will provide training on the use of these tools as well as quality assurance for the data collection process. The population sampling will be conducted in cooperation with the National Statistical Office (NSO) to ensure the selection of appropriate and representative enumeration areas, and simple random sampling within these areas will be used to recruit participants with the specific characteristics required for the study, as determined by the National Statistical Office. The outcome of this study will be the development of a value set for EQ-5D-Y that can be appropriately applied to Thai children aged 8-15 years. This value set will be used for ongoing economic evaluations of public health interventions for children in Thailand.
