BACKGROUND: The EQ-5D-Y-3L and the EQ-5D-Y-5L are friendly-child versions of the EQ-5D instruments that measures health-related quality of life in children and adolescents aged 8-15 years. However, the measurement properties of both instruments have not been tested in Brazilian kids yet. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to test the measurement properties of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and the EQ-5D-Y-5L in Brazilian children and adolescents with and without disabling musculoskeletal pain. METHODS: This is a methodological study with test-retest of 7 days interval. We included children and adolescents with disabling musculoskeletal pain (who reported pain in the back, neck, arms, or legs that lead to school absenteeism and/or interference with normal and/or recreational activities) and without any musculoskeletal pain from public and private schools in Sao Paulo state. Children and adolescents answered the self-reported versions of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and the EQ-5D-Y-5L. We tested test-retest reliability using Kappa coefficient for descriptive system and intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) for EQ-VAS, construct (convergent) validity (classified as sufficient if at least 75% of the results were in accordance with our pre-specified hypothesis) using the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory questionnaire version 4.0 (PedsQLTM) and the Child Health Utility 9D (CHU9D), the ceiling and floor effects of the instruments using the dimensions’ descriptive system and health profile, and the feasibility by the missing responses. RESULTS: From 356 children and adolescents included in this study, 181 reported disabling musculoskeletal pain and 175 did not report any musculoskeletal pain. Most children and adolescents were boys (53%) with a mean age of 11.5 years-old (standard deviation [SD]: 2.9). In the descriptive system, reliability was inadequate ranged from 0.25 to 0.48 for the EQ-5D-Y-3L, and 0.20 to 0.49 for the EQ-5D-Y-5L, considering children and adolescents with and without musculoskeletal pain. Reliability for the EQ-VAS ranged from moderate (ICC: 0.40, 95% CI: 0.24 to 0.53, for children and adolescents without musculoskeletal pain) to substantial (ICC: 0.81, 95% CI: 0.72 to 0.87, for children and adolescents with disabling musculoskeletal pain). Construct (convergent) validity was sufficient for the EQ-5D-Y-3L and the EQ-5D-Y-5L compared to the PedsQLTM for children and adolescents with disabling musculoskeletal pain, but insufficient for those without any musculoskeletal pain. Construct (convergent) validity was insufficient for the EQ-5D-Y-3L and sufficient for the EQ-5D-Y-5L when compared to the CHU9D for two subsamples of children and adolescents. There was lower ceiling effect of the EQ-5D-Y-5L compared to the EQ-5D-Y-3L for almost all the dimensions of the descriptive system, and also for the health profile (11111). The missing responses rate ranged from 0.6% to 1.7% for the EQ-5D-Y-3L, 0% to 12.7% for the EQ-5D-Y-5L, and 4% to 5.5% for the EQ-VAS. CONCLUSION: The reliability for the descriptive system was inadequate for the EQ-5D-Y-3L and the EQ-5D-Y-5L, and the EQ-VAS presented moderate to substantial reliability. Both instruments presented sufficient construct (convergent) validity when compared to PedsQLTM for children and adolescents with disabling musculoskeletal pain. When compared to the CHU9D, the EQ-5D-Y-5L had sufficient construct (convergent) validity, considering the two subsamples. The Brazilian-Portuguese version of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L can be used in research and in the clinical practice to assess the health-related quality of life, especially of children and adolescents with disabling musculoskeletal pain. Furthermore, the EQ-5D-Y-3L can be recommended in future economic evaluations conducted in Brazil.
