Background: The EuroQol Health and Wellbeing (EQ-HWB) is a broad, generic instrument designed for use across health, social care, and public health contexts. The developer team proposed wording, ordering, response level and layout modifications to improve conceptual clarity and cultural fit; however, evidence regarding the modified items in clinical populations, especially in LMICs remains limited.Objective: To evaluate the relevance and comprehensibility of modified EQ-HWB-9/EQ-HWB items compared with the experimental (original) versions among Indonesian cancer patients and their caregivers.Methods: Semi-structured, one-to-one qualitative interviews were conducted with 60 participants (30 patient-caregiver dyads) recruited from oncology outpatient services. All patients were undergoing active treatment (radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy) and temporarily resided in patient lodging houses near the hospital. Diagnoses included breast, thyroid, colorectal, cervical, ovarian, bone, and nasopharyngeal cancers, and hematologic malignancies. The mean age of patients was 40.07 years (SD = 15.50; 72.41% female), and of caregivers 39.37 years (SD = 12.90; 53.33% female). All interviews followed the EQ-HWB Working Group’s standardized qualitative testing protocol. Participants completed the modified EQ-HWB (which includes the EQ-HWB-9 items) and subsequently compared each modified item with its original version using structured probes. Audio-recorded interviews were transcribed verbatim and analysed thematically by two independent coders using the WG coding framework for understanding, relevance, and preference.Key results: Comprehensibility was high across EQ-HWB-9 items for both groups, though interpretation issues arose for a small number of participants depending on the item. Relevance was consistently strong, with most participants linking items to treatment effects, functional limitations, emotional strain, and caregiving demands. Clear preference patterns emerged: (1) Activities-first ordering was favoured by most respondents who perceived it as a more natural “general-to-specific” flow; (2) the shorter, non-repeating stem was preferred by nearly all participants for reducing redundancy; (3) the modified Mobility wording (“or”) and the inclusion of bracketed examples improved clarity for both patients and caregivers; and (4) the modified frequency label (“a little of the time”) was consistently understood more clearly than “only occasionally”. Positive-framed long-form EQ-HWB items were also administered and generally understood. Implications: The study provides item-level qualitative evidence supporting several proposed refinements to the modified EQ-HWB-9/EQ-HWB and demonstrates the feasibility and acceptability of the modified items in an oncology population in an LMIC setting. Results from this study contributed to the pool of evidence for the finalisation of the EQ-HWB-9 and the dossier development.
