BackgroundThe Version Management Committee (VMC) has identified a potential issue with the Arabic versions of EQ-5D-5L, whereby the label for level 4 was translated in a way that more closely corresponds to “acute” rather than “severe”. To address this issue, all Arabic versions will be updated with revised level 4 labels that more accurately reflect the intended meaning. Several EQ-5D-5L value sets developed in Arabic speaking countries, including Egypt, Morocco, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, were originally based on the version containing “acute” label. At present, it is unclear whether the revised wording will have any impact on these existing value sets. The VMC has therefore requested that the VWG investigates whether the label change results in any meaningful differences in valuation outcomes.ObjectivesTo assess whether the relative position of the level 4 labels on a preference-based scale differs significantly between the original and revised labels.MethodsOnline latent scale DCE surveys will be conducted in two Arabic-speaking countries: Egypt and Saudi Arabia. In each country, a representative sample of 1000 respondents will be included, with half completing valuation tasks using the original level 4 labels (Group A), and the other half using the revised labels (Group B). Each respondents will complete 12 DCE choice pairs as used in the EQ-VT DCE design. Data from each country will be analyzed separately using mixed logit models with supplementary scaling parameters to identify differences between groups A and B. These supplementary parameters will allow us to determine whether there are significant differences in the relative importance assigned to level-dimension combinations, whilst accounting for differences in scale and response consistency between the groups.Potential ImplicationsIf no significant differences are observed between the two groups in either country, it is unlikely that the revised labels will materially affect existing EQ-5D-5L value sets. However, if significant differences are identified, it may become necessary to adjust existing value sets developed using the original Arabic level 4 labels. The current study is explorative in nature, and is intended as an initial assessment of whether meaningful differences exist. If that is the case, the VWG will prepare a follow-up proposal outlining potential approaches for revising existing value sets.
