Abstract Please provide a short summary of your completed work. This information will be included in the EuroQol database on funded research and may also be presented on the research section of the EuroQol website Objectives The COVID-19 pandemic forced many countries to implement confinement measures to limit the spread of the virus. Measuring the loss in terms of quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) may provide a commensurable basis for comparison of the impact of COVID-19 and related factors to health and well-being. The aim of this research was to explore the impact of the first 28 days of COVID-19 related confinement measures on the health-related quality of life (HRQoL) of the Spanish general population. Methods We implemented a quota-based online survey to collect age, gender, region and EQ-5D-5L data. The data collection was conducted in four waves with 500 general population respondents each: one conducted shortly before the lockdown and 3 follow-ups conducted every consecutive week. Each wave of sampling was independent, and any overlap of respondents between waves would be coincidental. EQ-5D-5L responses were described using the proportion of respondents reporting each level of functioning on each dimension over the follow-up period. Utility values were retrieved from the Spanish EQ-5D-5L value set. For comparison with pre-covid responses, data from the 2011-2012 National Health Survey (NHS) was taken as reference. We calculated the QALY loss over the 21 days of the follow-up period as the difference between utility values from the reference sample and the corresponding values for the 4 waves of our data collection. QALY loss for the entire duration of the lockdown was estimated taking the mean QALY-loss for the 4 waves. For comparison, we estimated the total QALY-loss associated with premature deaths due to COVID-19 in Spain until the end of the study, assuming that they would otherwise have lived to the estimated life expectancy for their corresponding age/sex group, with values corresponding to their respective mean utilities based on the reference sample. Results Comparing the baseline results to the follow-up results shows little change with respect to the distributions of reported problems in any of the 5 dimensions during the follow-up period. However, results for anxiety/depression show a 32% increase in the proportion of reported problems (most prominently for level 2, from 9% to 35%). The Spanish population was estimated to accrue a total of 1,994,216 QALYs over the study period. Based on the corresponding reference data, the population should have accrued 2,054,737 QALYs, leading to a loss for the general Spanish population of 60,520 QALYs over 21 days. If the situation observed were to continue for the entire lockdown, the corresponding loss would be 285.310 QALYs. For comparison, the estimated lifetime loss associated with the 15,956 individuals who had died from COVID-19 by the end of the study would have tallied 146,584 QALYs. Conclusions A population under a lockdown situation reported higher rates of anxiety/depression problems than in a regular situation. On a country-wide scope, this may lead to a substantial loss in terms of QALYs, especially over longer periods of time.
