Objectives: To assess the feasibility of estimating an EQ-5D-5L value set using a small study design in cancer patients and to cross-compare the EQ-5D-5L health state preferences of cancer patients with those of the general public in China. Methods: Patients with clinically diagnosed cancers were recruited from two hospitals in Shanghai, China. In face-to-face interviews using the EQ-PVT survey, 31 health states (divided into three blocks) and 80 pairs of health states (divided into eight blocks) were valued by the cancer patients using the cTTO and DCE methods, respectively. cTTO data was modelled alone or jointly with DCE data. Forty-eight models using different model specifications (cross-attribute level effect [CALE] and additive models), model assumptions for effects (random/fixed), data heteroscedasticity (yes/no), and censoring (yes/no) were estimated. The best-performed model was identified in terms of monotonicity of estimated model coefficients and out-of-sample prediction accuracy. Results: Data of all the 221 cancer patients who participated in the study were included in this analysis. The hybrid CALE model using both the TTO and DCE data performed better in terms of prediction accuracy (Lin’s concordance coefficient=0.989; root mean squared error=0.058). Compared to the Chinese general population, the EQ-5D-5L value set based on cancer patients’ preferences were higher except for health states characterized by severe or extreme pain/discomfort. The rank of dimensional importance based on the general population was mobility (0.303), pain/discomfort (0.266), anxiety/depression (0.227), self-care (0.222) and usual activities (0.205), while in cancer patients, the order was pain/discomfort (0.421), anxiety/depression (0.267), mobility (0.262), usual activities (0.212) and self-care (0.211). Conclusion: This study demonstrated the feasibility of using a small design for developing EQ-5D-5L value sets based on cancer patients’ health preferences. Since there were signs of differences between the preferences of cancer patients and general public, it may be valuable to develop patient-specific value sets for use in clinical decision-making and economic evaluation.
