Introduction: Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) is a multi-dimensional, which typically assesses peoples’ health across a number of dimensions (e.g., physical, psychological, and social). As for the adult populations, assessing the HRQoL of youth populations is important in public health to monitor population health over time, identify groups with a risk of poor health, and evaluate treatments. Currently, the child-friendly HRQoL instrument, the EQ-5D-Y, is receiving more attention. However, in resource-limited, low-income countries (e.g. Ethiopia), the use of the EQ-5D-Y or other HRQoL instruments has been limited hence, this study explores new opportunities in using the instrument in this context. This study aimed to describe HRQoL among adolescents in Ethiopia using the EQ-5D-Y-3L instrument. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted to collect data among adolescent students, aged 12-17 years. Adolescents were recruited from both public and private schools in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Data were collected using a prepared data collection pack which included: the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L (including the VAS), questions about self-rated health, mental distress, disease, and students’ self-reported socioeconomic status (SES). Multiple logistic and multiple linear regression analyses were used to assess associations between socio-demographic characteristics and the reported problems across the EQ-5D-Y-3L dimensions and the VAS score respectively. Data was analyzed using SPSS version 26. Results: A total of 4,677 adolescents (2,176 boys and 2,501 girls) with a mean age of 14 years (range: 12-17 years) answered the survey. More than one-third (42%) and nearly half (47.3%) of adolescents reported problems in at least one of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L dimensions respectively. Adolescents reported problems in mobility: 4.3%, self-care: 2.4%, usual activity: 8.5%, pain and discomfort: 20.6%, feeling worried, sad, or unhappy: 32.4% dimensions of the EQ-5D-Y-3L. Girls reported more problems in all dimensions, except ‘Mobility’, than boys. Girls and older adolescents (15-17 years) reported more problems with ‘pain or discomfort’ and ‘feeling worried, sad, or unhappy’ compared to boys or younger adolescents respectively. Adolescents with self-reported illness were more likely to report problems in all dimensions of EQ-5D-Y-3L and to have lower VAS scores compared to those not reporting illness. Mental distress (separate questions that asked about feeling stressed or depressed) was found to be associated with decreased VAS scores. SES, educational level, and employment status of the parents were found to be associated with reported HRQoL of adolescents. Conclusion: This study presents how Ethiopian adolescents from the general population report their HRQoL using the EQ-5D-Y-3L instrument. The EQ-5D-Y-3L instrument was able to identify groups of adolescents with lower HRQoL, as age, sex, self-reported illness, parent’s educational status, parent’s occupational status, and SES were associated with the adolescent’s health status. The higher response rate and completeness of the instrument indicate the feasibility and usefulness of the instrument among the adolescent population in Ethiopia (a low-middle income country).
