Since it is common to include only a subset of health states (or health profiles) in any valuation study, statistical modelling is commonly applied to establish the effect of the health state on the elicited values. The resulting regression formula enables a value prediction for all health profiles, in terms of a predicted group mean, commonly called the value set or 'tariff'. The validity of this formula, essentially an extrapolation, depends on both features of the collected valuation data, and the statistical model used. The standard approach for obtaining VAS or TTO observations for this purpose has been the definition of a deliberate selection of health states. This selection has often been on average rather mild, that is rather healthy (e.g. the MVH set), and the subset rather small, with between 17 and 43 health states of 243 possible states being valued. The standard approach for modeling has been linear regression (not multilevel) with as main effects the descriptive variables of the health states. In case of the EQ-5D-3L these descriptive variables are represented by 10 dummy variables to cover the 5 trichotomized dimensions. Interaction models have also been used for several reasons, the most common interaction model defined by the so called N3 term. This standard approach is vulnerable for misspecification of the value function; past decisions on design and analysis were mainly a combination of theoretical reasoning and partial studies, with many issues undecided. These issues matter in view of extension of the system to EQ-5D-5L which requires the tariff to be re-estimated. To arrive at empirical evidence we subjected (1) two existing saturated EQ-5D-3L datasets and (2) simulated datasets (based on these observed data) to a systematic analysis. Our conclusions can be split into 3 parts: part 1 refers to the selection of health states, and their number, part 2 refers to the required number of responses per health state, an issue connected to inter- and intra-individual reliability, and part 3 refers to choices in the analysis of such incomplete datasets in particular if interaction terms are considered. A provisional conclusion on TTO (vs. VAS) is made, and the relevance for EQ-5D-5L is mentioned. Deliberate selection of health states, taking features into account of the assumed position of a health state on the 0-1 scale, or the composition of attributes such as the avoidance of complex or unlikely (‘stressed’) states, influences the probability of misspecification. This selection effect is strong, if the so called sampling ratio (the number of health states empirically valued divided by the number of all health states defined by the classification system) is equal or below 1:10. In general misspecification is difficult to catch in 1 quantitative measure: the performance in the upper part of the scale (the six states with at least four level 1s) dominates most measures. Here our judgments are, in model terms, non-linear and non-additive. Misspecification on average appears the least when severe and/or complex (‘stressed’) states dominate the selection of health states. When mild states dominate, then obviously the estimation benefits for the very best states, but these models perform, however, worse along the rest of the scale, which becomes clear with reasonably low sampling ratios (i.e. small subsets). Excluding the most upper part, misspecification is the least if so called stressed health states are overrepresented. In visual terms the fit is even much better. The MVH-selection represents a selection prone to more misspecification, since it is not only mild but also avoids stressed states. The sampling ratio of the health state is a critical feature for misspecification. In a case of >100 respondents per health state (hence little uncertainty on the mean), a sampling ratio of 1:10 or better (higher, say 1:8) is perhaps good enough (health states subject to the above selection criteria). Below 1:10 health state sampling, the bias of the health state selection criteria becomes stronger, like effects of low reliability. Lower sampling ratios than 1:10 are therefore hazardous. Any further conclusions on the sampling ratio depend on the reliability of the mean. So far we are not informed on inter-individual and intra-individual variation, which - with the number of respondents/observations per state - determines the reliability of the mean. If reliability is high, a limited number of observations per health state (say 10) suffices to obtain stable VAS means, but in practice 10 observations is not enough. This is even more so in TTO were reliability seems lower, and were lower values are a mix of values (and transformations) obtained by 2 different methods for better than dead and worse than dead. Returning to the sampling ratio in case of VAS values: if the number of respondents per health state inevitably is small, the number of health states cannot be small. And also, if the sampling ratio is low, interaction analysis is not advocated as it increases misspecification of the means of the health state values that were not part of the subset empirically valued, regardless of the source of the error. The interconnection between sampling ratio en reliability makes a simple conclusion on the minimal number of respondents hard to make. In TTO values and models, biases seem to have a stronger impact because models were quite distorted due to the lower end with negative values. Here the observations per health state should be even higher than in VAS models, and medians instead of means might be considered. Our modelling approach was simple in this regard; the effects of statistical or explanatory treatment of individual variation remains to be investigated (by multilevel analysis of modelling individual effects), as this might substantially decrease the confidence interval of the mean values as has been shown in similar datasets. In general terms interaction models (beyond main effect models) are likely to introduce misspecification, but one or two interaction terms may be conditionally profitable. The 1s and 3s interaction model was not particularly beneficial to improve model results above main effects models. The reason for the instable results are the irregularities in the interplay between domains along the 0-1 scale. The N3 model approach appears fairly accurate in large samples. Rather than that it changes lower state estimates, it generally rises the estimations of the better and best values. The better fit of the upper states compensates fit losses at the middle and lower end. In particular small sample models gained with the N3 interaction term, but on 1 occasion predictions with a small subset and N3 were wrong. In practice we do not known the truth, and in view of the other results the probability of such 'of the road' models which can not be recognized should not be underestimated. The driving force behind misspecification are the irregularities at the top of the scale (the jump of 11111 to the states with just one domain level changed say 12111). A lower sampling ratio (small subset) rapidly increases misspecification to unacceptable levels, in particular if means themselves are uncertain (e.g. with few observations per health state such as in the Australian design). This in turn increases interaction analysis risks. Therefore we regard main effects models superior (less risky) if sampling ratios are below 1: 10. Interaction strategies - if any - should be modest like N3. It seems useful to investigate in analytical strategies at the individual level to cope with the observed irregularities and to increase reliability of the (adjusted) means per health state. As said, TTO model results performed much less well compared to VAS, due to unreliable means and the effect of (large) negative values. Still most systematic observations were the same as in VAS. Also at the upper part and, to a lesser degree at the lower part of the scale misspecification follows the same pattern as in VAS. Considerable difference however existed in the lowest part of the scale. Our study showed that preference reversals (of parameter coefficients) and inconsistencies in terms of coefficients should be reinterpreted. These reversals surprisingly were design and analysis artefacts rather than 'wrong data'. As our data showed, the effect of an 'unlucky' choice of health states, low respondent numbers and/or of 'unlucky' data analysis (interaction term choices) may be provide utterly wrong models without internal options to check. Our pilot study provides warnings, and a methodological consistent strategy to find an optimal mix of design and analytical choices. Our study, however, did not provide a best strategy, not for EQ-5D-3L, nor for EQ-5D-5L. The following guidance for future studies may nevertheless be given. First of all the observed means must be stable. Whether is the case with 20, 30 or more observations per health state is to be established. We guess that below 30 respondents per health state the reliability of the observed mean easily becomes too low. Second, health state selections can be chosen selectively (mainly to improve the upper part of the scale), but a modelling strategy (to be developed) which would cover the upper jump/gap better with say 1 parameter might be favourable. For the remainder of the scale, overrepresentation of stressed states is better or, as we assume, a factorial design. Our study showed that there is no reason to avoid difficult, complex states. The removal of inconsistent respondents is of little effect. Finally additive main effects models are a robust and appropriate choice but modelling the individual effects seems an attractive complement. This pilot study is subject to limitations such as the datasets used, the valuation methods studied, the limited number of options in terms of health states choices, respondent numbers, and many regression features. We could not decide on one best parameter of misspecification, where new ones are proposed to cover the applicational requirements better. A final limitation is that at this stage little can be said on the bolt-on strategy. At this stage the most important lesson is that a sufficient number of health states and respondents is required, and interaction analysis should not be a first strategy.
