Aims of the PhD proposal The overall aims of this PhD proposal is to allow a PhD student to gain theoretical knowledge of and practical experience in the following three topics: 1) assessing the psychometric performance of bolt-on items alongside the EQ-5D-5L, and 2) explore psychometric properties of the EQ-HWB-S and the relationship with other instruments that measure health and well-being across countries and within sub-groups of countries.  Data-analysis and datasets The PhD student will gain practical experience with a range of data-analysis techniques, including techniques to explore psychometric performance and factor analysis. We will use the POPCORN dataset. The POPCORN study is a multi-country longitudinal study. Data were collected among an adult general population sample at T1 (April-May, 2020), T2 (May-June, 2021) and T3 (May-June, 2022). The POPCORN questionnaires have core modules that include several instruments to measure health and well-being. In the design of the POPCORN survey, extra questions (e.g. bolt-on items) have been added for methodological purposes, outside the primary research objectives of POPCORN study itself.  Supervision Bas Janssen and Juanita Haagsma will be the lead supervisors of the PhD candidate. Juanita Haagsma has 10 years of experience supervising PhD students.  Employment of PhD student During the PhD trajectory, the PhD student will be employed at the Department of Public Health, section Health Technology Assessment and Implementation, of the Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Duration The duration of the PhD proposal is three years. This time period is needed to reach the criteria to qualify for the PhD according to Department of Public Health standards. Deliverables The PhD project will result in at least 5 peer-reviewed international academic publications; out of these, 4 as first-author and 1 second-author, at least one (poster) presentation at the EuroQol Academy meeting and at least one (poster) presentation at an international conference and a PhD thesis (open access on the Erasmus University website) that meets the criteria of the Department of Public Health, Erasmus MC.
