Background. Worldwide, there is a need to recognize the distinct health needs of Indigenous people, address inequalities of health experienced by Indigenous people, and improve the appropriateness of health care services and measures of chronic disease. In the context of colonized countries, there is need to examine current (colonized) systems of measuring health-related quality of life and traditional approaches to measuring and valuing health to establish relevance of these approaches to, and appropriateness for, Indigenous people. This will improve recommendations for the use of preference-based measures (PBMs), such as the EQ-5D-5L, in Indigenous people and their application in evaluating effectiveness of healthcare. Objectives. This study aimed to (1) review the literature reporting the use of indirect or direct PBMs for Indigenous people, in terms of application of direct or indirect measures (which PBMs have been used, for which Indigenous groups), development or translation, or performance (validity, reliability), (2) explore validity of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Quality Appraisal Tool in the context of Indigenous Peoples in Canada, (3) explore the validity of the EQ-5D-5L (Canadian version) and how well it represents health-related quality of life for Indigenous people in Canada, and (4) explore conceptual feasibility of traditional choice-based valuation tasks and how these techniques align with Indigenous worldview. Methods. The first project was a systematic review, following standard methodological protocols including support of an expert librarian, a search of multiple major databases (n=13), and screening by two reviewers. Elements of ethically engaged research were considered indicators of quality. To address the absence of a widely adopted quality appraisal tool to assess ethically engaged research, an Australian quality appraisal tool was subsequently mapped to select existing national and regional ethical guidance for research with Indigenous people in Canada. QAT questions were mapped to source concepts, and cross tabulated in visual form. Convergence and gaps were identified. In the second project, qualitative description and Two-Eyed Seeing guided exploration of validity of the EQ-5D-5L and valuation techniques with urban Indigenous participants. Recruitment, data collection, analysis, and dissemination approaches were co-designed with Indigenous research partners. Participants were First Nations, Inuit, or Metis people living in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, or nearby urban center (urban Indigenous) working in health, policy, leadership, or community positions, and willing to share their individual knowledge of Indigenous health and wellness. Semi-structured interviews were co-facilitated with an Indigenous research partner. Concurrent data collection and analysis included member-checking, peer debriefing, reflexivity journals, and an audit trail. Findings. The systematic review demonstrated a large number of recent publications in diverse areas of research reporting the use of PBMs in Indigenous people. It also showed relatively little evidence on their performance in various Indigenous populations, and none in Canada. Similarities and a few gaps were found between the Australian Quality Assessment Tool for Indigenous-engaged research when mapped to ethical guidance in Canada. There may be space for more Indigenous specific instruments or domains, and a shift to strength-based wording within the EQ-5D-5L. The context of colonization and colonial impacts on Indigenous health and ways of living must also be considered when measuring HRQL. In the second study, participants expressed concern for inaccurate measurement and potential for negative impact on Indigenous people. Conceptualization and feasibility of the TTO and DCE may be affected by the content of the descriptive system presented, and the ability to envision the choice options as realistic. Lastly, the concept of “trading all” raised questions for participants. Discussion/Significance. This research indicates there is work to be done to improve performance (starting with face validity) of HRQL instruments, such as the EQ-5D-5L, currently in use in Canada for Indigenous people. This study can inform conversations about how the EQ-5D-5L and traditional valuation tasks should be used (or not) to advise health policy decisions affecting Indigenous Peoples in Canada.
