Objectives The EuroQol Group has developed an extended version of the EQ-5D-Y with five response levels for each of its five dimensions (EQ-5D-Y-5L). The psychometric performance of the three response level version (EQ-5D-Y-3L) has been reported in several studies involving both healthy children as well as clinical populations, but that of the EQ-5D-Y-5L has only been reported in a few studies. This study aimed to translate and psychometrically evaluate the Chichewa (Malawi) versions of both the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L. Methods The EQ-5D-Y-3L, EQ-5D-Y-5L and PedsQL™ 4.0 self-report Chichewa versions were administered to children and adolescents aged 8-17 years in Blantyre, Malawi. Both the EQ-5D-Y-3L and the EQ-5D-Y-5L were evaluated using gold standard psychometric methods, including missing data, floor/ceiling effects, reliability (internal consistency) and validity (convergent, discriminant, known-group and empirical). Results A total of 289 participants (95 healthy, and 194 chronic and acute) self-completed the questionnaires. There was little problem with missing data (0.7). Convergent validity tested with PedsQL™ 4.0 self-report was found to be satisfactory (correlation >0.4). However, correlation between some of the dimensions for both versions of the EQ-5D-Y and the PedsQL™ 4.0 sub-scales was mixed. While there was evidence of discriminant validity with respect to gender and age (no association with EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L sum and utility scores), it was not evident for school grade (p<0.05). As regards empirical validity, the EQ-5D-Y-5L was 31%-91% less efficient than the EQ-5D-Y-3L at detecting differences in health status using external measures. Conclusions The EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L were both found to be reliable and valid for use among children and adolescents although with some limitations. Further, psychometric testing is required for test re-test reliability and responsiveness that could not be carried out in this study due to COVID-19 restrictions.
