Background: The EQ Health and Wellbeing (EQ-HWB) is a new health and wellbeing measure evaluating health, social care and carer related quality-of-life (QoL). Continuous rehabilitation care is a hybrid clinical and informal customized intervention for convalescent patients, senior citizens and disabled people. The geriatric rehabilitation service, including physical therapy, occupational therapy and rehabilitation nursing, aims to optimize postoperative recovery, enhance functional capacity and improve the quality of life of old people. The patient-reported health related quality-of-life evidence is critical for evidence-based care pathway design and clinical decision-making. This is an area where EQ-HWB has an advantage through its comprehensive measure of health and wellbeing quality-of-life change compared with other measures. However, EQ-HWB feasibility, acceptability and validity has yet to be tested for use in formal or informal rehabilitation care for the old population. Additionally, the consistency of different administration methods and feasibility of using EQ-HWB in longitudinal routine assessment has not been tested. Aim: The proposed research seeks to assess the feasibility, acceptability and validity of using EQ-HWB in routine geriatric rehabilitation QoL assessment in care facilities and for home care using longitudinal cohort study, as well as providing responsiveness evidence for the measure with specific patient group. The data collection will also further validate the modified Chinese version EQ-HWB and the proxy-administrated EQ-HWB.  Method: we propose a research project with three rehabilitation patient groups: Cohort 1: in-patient rehabilitation patients in post operative recovery (n=120); Cohort 2: old people with mild cognition impairment, who will receive regular GP and care service (n=120); Cohort 3: senile diseases patients receiving frequent physiotherapy including massage and acupuncture (n=120). The three cohorts represent the main characteristics of geriatric rehabilitation patients. This study will leverage participant recruitment and data collection on the Patient Care Network in Shandong Province, China. This study will collect longitudinal QoL data and clinical data with three measurement points (baseline, second month, third month) using EQ-HWB and EQ-5D-5L from the patients, their main informal carer and the lead nurse of rehabilitation treatment team (with proxy version). Data will be collected at healthcare service institute (cohort 1 and 3) or their home (cohort 2). Ceiling effect, floor effect, convergent validity between multi-measures, known-group validity, proxy-self-reporting convergency and responsiveness of the EQ-HWB and EQ-5D-5L will be explored. Additionally, the study will explore the instrument performance on evaluating rehabilitation effectiveness of care service with longitudinal data, by comparing the EQ-HWB result with EQ-5D-5L and clinical records. Contribution: his will be the first study to comprehensively assess the psychometric property of EQ-HWB instrument in frail elderly in multiple care settings in China. Evidence will support the HWB working group to develop future EQ-HWB protocol and further revisions of the instrument.
