Background: Health-related quality of life measures represents individuals’ preferences for a specific health state and are used to estimate one of the most common clinical outcomes in economic evaluations, the quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs). The PedsQL, EQ-5D-Y-3L, EQ-5D-Y-5L, and Child Health Utility 9-Dimension (CHU9D) are the most common health-related quality of life measures used in children and adolescents. Although these instruments were validated for Brazilian population, the EQ-5D-Y instruments were developed for children and adolescents aged 8-15 years and CHU9D was developed for children and adolescents aged 7-17 years. The EuroQol Toddler and Infant Populations (EQ-TIPS) as a generic measure of health-related quality of life for children aged 0-3 years. However, the assessment of the psychometric properties of this instrument has not been tested in Brazilian population yet. Objective: To cross-culturally adapt and assess the psychometric properties of the EQ-TIPS-3L and EQ-TIPS-5L in Brazilian children. Methods: Caregivers of children aged 0 to 48 months will be recruited from Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil. The sample will include children with and without health conditions. The EQ-TIPS-3L and EQ-TIPS-5L will be translated and cross-culturally adapted into Brazilian-Portuguese. All caregivers will answer the proxy interviewer administration versions of the EQ-TIPS-3L, EQ-TIPS-5L, and PedsQL. Furthermore, caregivers of children with a health condition will answer specific-disease measures. All caregivers will also answer the EQ-HWB-9 considering their health. The psychometric properties assessed in this study will be test-retest reliability (based on reliability and measurement error), construct validity (convergent and discriminative), responsiveness, ceiling and floor effects, acceptability, feasibility, and distribution of responses of the EQ-TIPS-3L EQ-TIPS-5L, and PedsQL in Brazilian children. Furthermore, the impact of the child's health on the caregiver will be assessed using the EQ-HWB-9. Discussion: Economic evaluations have been increasingly conducted in Brazil to support healthcare decision-making processes. Although the quality of these studies is considered satisfactory, Brazilian guidelines suggest improvements in the methods used to assess health-related quality of life. The translation and cross-culturally adaptation into Brazilian-Portuguese and the psychometric properties testing of the EQ-TIPS instruments in Brazilian children will facilitate the dissemination and use of this instrument in clinical and research settings across Brazil.Keywords: Health-related quality of life; Infant; Toddler; Psychometric properties
