Earlier this year, our research team was awarded funding from the National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) Policy Research Programme (PRP), supported by the Department of Health, to undertake an EQ-5D-5L value set for Englandstudy. The research is being undertaken as a collaboration between the Office of Health Economics and Sheffield University. Data collection is currently underway, with sampling and face to face interviews being undertaken throughout England by the social survey company Ipsos MORI. As the research funding is provided under the auspices of England’s Department of Health, we were advised by the Department of Health that the relevant definition of the ‘general public’, from whom to collect data, should be restricted to ‘the general public of England’ only –not the wider UK –and that funding could not be provided for the collection of any data outside England. This issue of whether this study should be focused just on England, or on the UK, had for some time been the subject of extensive discussion with the Department of Health –in the two years prior to submitting our proposal, this issue had been discussed in a number of key meetings between the EuroQol Group and the Department of Health. We had also consulted with colleagues in NICE (Carole Longson and Bhash Naidoo) and the Scottish Medicines Consortium (SMC) (Andrew Walker) on this issue.The 5L value set for England which we will produce for England as an outcome of our current work will be used by the Department of Health in England-specific applications -for example, in the analysis of data from the English NHS PROMs programme, and fromthe Health Survey for England. However, other decision making bodies that are very important users of the EQ-5D are responsible for slightly different populations. For example, NICE’s remit covers both England and Wales. The SMC makes decisions regarding health care technologies in Scotland. Both NICE and the SMC currently use the Dolan (1997) value set for the UK. Importantly, the system of value based pricing for new medicines, to be introduced in 2014, will be UK-wide -not just for England. As estimates of QALY gains (and therefore EQ-5D-5L data) will be central to VBP, a UK value set for EQ-5D-5L would ensure health states are valued in a manner fitting with the populations affected by VBP decisions.We are concerned that by restricting the value set to England, and failing to capitalise on the current opportunity to extend data collection efforts to Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, that this could potentially:(a)compromise the acceptability and perceived relevance of the new value set to key users such as NICE and in future decisions regarding VBP; and(b)adversely affect the use of the EQ-5D-5L in the UK.Because of these concerns, we sought advice from the England Department of Health on how to approach the Departments of Health in each of the ‘devolved governments’ of Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales. Since funding for the EQ-5D-5L value set for Englandstudy was confirmed in May this year, we have been vigorously pursuing contacts in each of those countries, via email and teleconferences, to explain the study and to explore their willingness to provide funding to support data collection in each country.Initially, there was strong interest in principle from all three countries. The Office of the Chief Scientist in Scotland was subsequently confirmed the availability of funds to support the collection of additional data from the Scottish general public. Unfortunately, and despite the efforts of the people we were in contact with in Northern Ireland and Wales (which included the Chief Medical Officers and Chief Pharmacists in each case), they were unable to secure the (relatively modest) budgets required in each country to facilitate data collection.Having now exhausted all other avenues for seeking external funding for data collection in Wales and NI, we therefore ask the EuroQol Group to consider providing funding for that. Details of the aims and budget request are provided below.
