Background: A recent study has piloted the use of the EQ-VT valuation protocol for valuing EQ-HWB-S. (Mukuria et al, 2022) While the EQ-VT protocol is a mature valuation protocol, there are several signs that the EQ-VT protocol may not be the most suitable method for valuing the EQ-HWB-S. For example, the costs of an EQ-VT cTTO study for EQ-HWB-S are prohibitive, which is directly related to the large representative sample and several interviewers that are required to complete the required face to face cTTO/DCE interviews. Furthermore, even with a large number of health states in the the EQ-VT protocol, realistically only a small subset of the total number of the 1.95 million EQ-HWB-S health states can be valuated. This results in substantial extrapolation uncertainty. Therefore, it is important to investigate other candidate valuation methods that are more promising for the valuation of EQ-HWB-S. More specifically, EuroQol’s valuation Working Group is currently piloting their DCE-duration protocol in a study in Trinidad and Tobago, for which the results will be available in Q1 2023, after which a final protocol version will be developed. This final protocol is also a promising candidate for the valuation of EQ-HWB-S. Aims: This study aims to perform a pilot valuation of the EQ-HWB-S using the DCE-duration valuation protocol as developed by EuroQol’s Valuation Working Group, to test the feasibility of this stand-alone DCE (i.e. without TTO) protocol for a more complex instrument such as EQ-HWB-S. Furthermore, this study aims to test the agreement between the results of the pilot of valuing EQ-HWB-S using EQ-VT by Mukuria et al. (Mukuria et al, 2022) Methods: An online administered DCE-Duration will be conducted in a representative sample of respondents from the UK. Each will be presented a set of 18 split triplets, which means that every respondent will make a total of 36 paired comparisons. The exact content of these split triplets will depend on the decisions made in the final DCE-Duration protocol, and a small pilot in which qualitative evidence is collected on the feasibility of the survey. The study will start with an informative prior design, which will be updated up to 6 times after a set number of responses (e.g. 10% of data collection, 20%, etc.). Mixed logit models with utility functions that allow for non-linear time durations will be used to model the data. The results of the current study will be compared to the EQ-HWB-S EQ-VT valuation pilot results, using Bland-Altman plots, to assess whether the estimated values are similar.
