Objectives: The valuation of children’s health states is gaining attention in the literature and a valuation protocol (EQ-5D-Y) has been designed, which is now being used to generate national value sets. However, there are still problems underlying this assessment tool. An important issue is that the obtained composite time trade-off (cTTO) utilities have been found to be higher for children than for adults. At this stage, it is not clear if these differences reflect truly higher utilities of the same health state when experienced by a child than by an adult, or if they are caused by other factors, which are not accounted for in the valuation procedure. Methods: We test whether the difference between children’s and adults’ cTTO valuations changes if a longer duration than the standard 10 years is used. Personal interviews with a sample of 150 adults in the UK, representative of the general public, were conducted. We employed the cTTO method to estimate utilities of four different health states, from both the adult and the proxy-child perspective, for durations of 10 and 20 years. Because time preferences are expected to have a larger distorting influence for longer durations, we correct the TTO valuations for perspective-specific time preferences in a separate task by means of the Direct Method. Results: The TTO utilities are higher for the proxy-child perspective than for the adult perspective. Discounting is close to 0 on average, with a sizable number of subjects showing negative discounting. Discount rates are slightly but significantly higher for children than for adults. After correcting TTO utilities for time preferences the child utilities are no longer significantly different from the adult utilities. No differences were found for the 10-year and 20-year cTTO tasks. Conclusions: In agreement with previous evidence, we find higher TTO utilities measured from a proxy-child perspective than from the own (adult) perspective. This difference is not affected using a 10-year or 20-year TTO duration, but it was no longer present after correcting for time preference. This suggests the child-adult gap is at least partially explained by differences in time preferences and highlights the value of correcting TTO measurements for these preferences.
