Objectives: The “Extending the QALY” (E-QALY) project aims to develop a broad measure of quality of life for application in economic evaluation in both health and social care. Subsequent to the face validation phase (stage 3 in the E-QALY project), the aim of this study was to conduct the psychometric testing of E-QALY candidate items based on data collected from German respondents to help inform the international selection of items for a longer E-QALY profile measure and a short classifier. Methods: An online survey was conducted using an online panel of people in Germany. We targeted cancer patients, carers and a healthy comparator group, where conditions were based on self-reports. The survey included 66 E-QALY items and the EQ-5D-5L, EQ-5D-3L, S-WEMWBS and EORTC QLQ-C300 instruments. Statistical analysis was conducted in accordance with the international psychometrics protocol developed in Sheffield. This includes classical psychometric analysis, such as analyses of inconsistencies and response distribution as well as analysing sensitivity to known-group differences. The domain structure was explored using exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis. Item response theory (IRT) analyses were used to assess item performance; this included differential item functioning (DIF), item fit and testing for local independence. Results: Overall, 496 participants were used in the analysis after excluding six respondents for inconsistencies. In total, 67% were identified as having a long-term condition, with 40% having cancer. In addition, 56% (n=280) reported to be a carer. The majority of items did not show problems with floor or ceiling effects, which were not justifiable by the sample. Items were able to discriminate between respondents with physical or mental health conditions and a healthy comparator group with moderate to large effect sizes, while smaller effect size were found for carers. Exploratory factor analysis indicates the need for a bi-factor model to account for positively and negatively worded items along the themes. The conceptual model was reasonable well confirmed on the German data using confirmatory factor analysis. IRT results suggested that most items had well-functioning response categories, few occurrences of item misfit or local independence within sub-domains, but with some problems with differential item functioning in many items. Conclusion: Derived from the findings of this study and based on the item performance, recommendations were made on the inclusion of items to be included for the E-QALY longer profile measure and the short classification system.
