Background: The EQ-5D-Y-3L valuation protocol and related methods research has spurred discussions on child health valuation, raising key questions about the source of preferences, perspective, age of child, dimension importance, anchoring on the QALY scale, and length of the value scale. Extensive empirical research funded by EuroQol explored these questions but does not provide universally applicable answers to the question of which methods are best. This is important as we prepare for valuation of the Y-5L. Stakeholder engagement and consensus-building activities to date have highlighted the challenges of standardizing methods globally: the social value judgements and priority setting principles of local decision makers may vary – suggesting a pluralistic approach to the valuation protocol for the Y-5L may be needed. However, several challenges remain, e.g. identification and categorization of the many potential approaches and accommodating jurisdictions where stakeholders are unable or unwilling to provide answers to normative questions. With this project, the youth valuation squad aims to explore if pluralistic valuation protocols may be feasible and desirable. Objective: • Analyze current stakeholder engagement materials and discussions relating to valuation of child HRQoL, identifying unresolved methodological challenges. • Formulate these challenges as distinct normative questions for stakeholder input and connect them to normative principles. • Merge these questions into a decision tree for a pluralistic valuation framework. • Assess available evidence for each branch, proposing feasible methodologies or highlighting research gaps. • Solicit feedback on the decision tree and assess its implications with EuroQol Exec and other stakeholders. • Establish a research agenda for branches lacking methodology guidance. Methods: The methodology includes a review of materials and papers to identify unresolved child health valuation challenges. These questions are structured into a decision tree to support and structure a pluralistic approach, with evidence assessed for each branch. Stakeholder input and interviews will validate the provisional decision tree, shaping a research agenda for potential pluralistic valuation.
