Cross-cultural studies of health-related quality of life (HRQoL) using generic or disease-specific instruments have consistently reported higher ceiling effects (i.e., the proportion of respondents reporting full health or no problems across all dimensions) among people from Asian cultures compared with Western populations. A recent meta-analysis found the ceiling effect in East/South-East Asia was higher than in Europe by 26% in EQ-5D-3L and by 7% in EQ-5D-5L (Cheng et al 2024). China appears to be the country that suffers most from this phenomenon. However, there has been no systematic investigation into the contributing factors or synthesis of existing hypotheses and empirical evidence. In this project, we synthesised relevant theories, models, and empirical evidence from multiple disciplines to develop a general conceptual framework explaining the ceiling effect phenomenon in HRQoL instruments across Asian and Western cultures. The framework, described from an Asian perspective, organises key factors across macro-, exo-, meso-, and microsystem levels: (1) Cultural factors (macrosystem), including holistic thinking, the view of health as the unity of mind and body, and collectivist social orientation; (2) Structural factors (exosystem), including socioeconomic conditions, social support networks, stigma, and healthcare systems; (3) Ways of perceiving, coping with, and reporting health problems (mesosystem); and (4) HRQoL instrument characteristics (microsystem) and (5) data collection processes (microsystem), including conceptual and semantic equivalence, question framing, recall period, mode of administration, sample representativeness, and intended data use. We further discussed how these factors interact and contribute to differences in the likelihood of reporting full health, and proposed several testable hypotheses for future research. We highlighted the importance of accounting for multilevel cultural and contextual influences when comparing HRQoL data across populations. The framework we developed has the potential to be applied to understand cross-cultural differences in health and wellbeing measurement and valuation We hosted an advisory meeting to seek advice on the framework with EuroQol Group members and external experts from China, Japan, Singapore, Australia, US and the UK. A poster has been presented at 2024 EuroQol Academy, and a manuscript has been prepared for submission to journal.
