This project is a 12-month study aiming to test and validate the EQ-5D-5L vision bolt-on item. The EQ-5D-5L vision bolt-on has not been fully tested against existing, established measures in vision in clinical populations. A major point of debate is how to instruct patients about wearing glasses or contact lenses when answering the vision question.The project aim is to determine whether this vision bolt-on item is reliable and valid in people with two major eye diseases: Age-Related Macular Degeneration (AMD) and Diabetic Eye Disease (DED), and in comparison to responses from the general public who do not have these conditions.The project will test several versions of the vision bolt-on:Non-instructed bolt-on (Vision 1): The current "best available" version that does not mention glasses or visual aids.Instructed “exploratory” bolt-on (Vision 2 and 3): Exploratory versions that specifically tells the patient to answer with their visual aids ("with glasses or other aids if you use them") from the EuroQol bolt-on Toolbox.Exploratory bolt-on (Vision 4): One additional experimental version from the EuroQol bolt-on Toolbox.To assess and compare the validity of the bolt-ons, the project will also use a proven, established measure: the VILL-UI (Vision Impairment in Low Luminance questionnaire – utility instrument) derived from the VILL-33 patient-reported outcome measure. This instrument is already validated across multiple European countries in AMD and DED and serves as an ideal standard for comparison. The study will recruit participants from the UK (London) and Germany (Bonn) to ensure the bolt-ons work in different languages and contexts:1. Clinical Population (n=300)This core group includes 300 patients (150 with AMD, 150 with DED), split evenly between the UK and Germany. Each patient will complete the EQ-5D-5L and all vision bolt-ons, along with the VILL-33 (including the VILL-UI items), twice over a short interval (two to four weeks).2. General Population (n=2,000)A large market research panel of 2,000 adults (1,000 from the UK, 1,000 from Germany) from the general public will be recruited. This sample will be used to determine if the bolt-on is truly capturing vision problems related to eye disease or if similar response patterns are seen in the general, non-clinical population.In addition, since there is no German translation of the vision bolt-on candidate items (Vision 1,2,3,4) a small group of 10 patients will ensure the German translation of the bolt-on is culturally and linguistically accurate. Translation will follow the EuroQol Version Management Committee guidelines for Toolbox items. The analysis will follow EuroQol guidelines for psychometric analysis of the bolt-on toolbox and will focus on several areas, including:Convergent and divergent validity: Comparing the results of the instructed and non-instructed bolt-ons against the VILL-UI in clinical and general populations.Known group validity: Testing the bolt-on's ability to accurately distinguish between people with and without eye disease and across severity groups within AMD and DED.Test-retest reliability: Checking the consistency of the bolt-on results over time where vision has not changed in clinical populations. Ceiling effects: Examining the presence of ceiling effects of the vision bolt-ons against the VILL-UI in clinical versus general populations.Since there is currently no official value set for the new EQ-5D-5L vision bolt-on, the study will use a summary score (level sum score) for analyses.
