Most of the existing studies that use EQ-5D to assess population health in China have observed high ceiling effects, approximately 80% when using EQ-5D-3L (‘3L’). In China, large-scale population surveys are conducted using face-to-face interviews. One hypothesis is that administering HRQoL questionnaires via face-to-face interviews in large-scale population surveys contributes to the high ceiling effects. However, there has been little research to investigate the impact of interviewer administration on the characteristics of the data or to explore potential strategies to improve data collection procedures and data quality. In addition, to date, most large-scale population health survey in China used the 3L version, with limited adoption of the EQ-5D-5L (‘5L’), despite evidence showing its superior performance with respect to lower ceiling effect and better discriminatory power in general population in other countries and among patient groups in China. This project aimed to provide a comprehensive analysis on the impact of mode of administration (MOA) on HRQoL data, and to provide evidence to support the transition from the 3L to the 5L. We conducted a qualitative study including (1) a thematic analysis of interview recordings from the 2020 population health survey (Nanjing CDC Survey) in Nanjing, China to identify how interviewers were administering EQ-5D-3L; and (2) focus group discussions with 10 interviewers from the 2021 Nanjing CDC Survey to explore the reasons for and implications of the interviewer approaches for the characteristics of the resultant EQ-5D data. We found that due to poor comprehension of questions among less educated populations, a lengthy overall survey (in which the EQ-5D questions were positioned toward the end) and interviewers’ lack of knowledge and training about patient-reported outcomes and EQ-5D in particular, there was a very high prevalence of ‘non-standard’ interviewer behaviours and approaches. Indeed, none of the interviewer approaches we observed complied with EuroQol expectations. Based on these findings, we extended the original scope of the project and designed and tested two interventions in the 2023 Nanjing CDC Survey by (1) providing interviewer training on EQ-5D; and (2) re-positioning the EQ-5D questionnaire to the beginning of the overall survey form. Our quantitative evaluation of these strategies showed that providing training to interviewers about the EQ-5D has a significant impact on reducing ceiling effects. However, where interviewers are not trained, it may be an advantage to position EQ-5D questionnaire to the end of the survey questionnaire. Furthermore, working in collaboration with the Nanjing CDC, we conducted parallel data collection of 3L and 5L in a subsample of the 2023 survey. Our analysis of the psychometric performance of the 3L and 5L supported the existing finding that the 5L showed superior performance in reducing ceiling effects, informativity, discriminatory performance. Our finding on the superior performance of 5L over 3L in general population in China adds to the evidence base and support the inclusion of 5L in future general population health surveys in China. Our findings on the impact of data collection procedure on ceiling effects and suggested interventions have important implications for the design and implementation of EQ-5D data collection via face-to-face interview in large-scale population surveys, which is the most commonly used mode of administering the EQ-5D in low-and middle-income countries.
