ABSTRACT: Introduction: The use of discrete choice experiments (DCEs) to value health outcomes captured by the EQ-5D has gained popularity in recent years. Research on DCE’s suggests they may be used as a standalone technique to produce values on a quality-adjusted life year (QALY) scale, and online DCE’s may one day supplant more conventional interviewer-based techniques due to their lower costs and ease of use. However, DCE’s are not without their own issues. The complexity of the choice task may be cognitively burdensome, forcing respondents to adopt heuristics. This may induce biases in the results.Common heuristics in DCE may include magnification (non-attenuation; e.g., only looking at lifespans), horizontal blindness (always choose left option), or favoring the status quo (e.g., choosing the option that most resembles current health). The sequence order may also play an important role in heuristics: arespondent may begin the survey with undeveloped preferences and base responses on previous questions, not true preferences. Some individuals may experience burn out and only resort to heuristics measures after a certain number of questions. Methods: Using two recently completed DCE surveys of the US general population (N=15,292), I tested for common heuristic approaches to an EQ-5D paired comparison task. An example paired comparison task may ask for an individual if they prefer (A) 10 years in health state 33333 or (B) 6 years in health state 11111. Each survey asked between 20-30 paired comparisons. Results: The analysis showed significant evidence of heuristic patterns and sequence effects in each study. As the survey progresses, individuals increasingly prefer the option with the longer lifespan (p-value<-0.01). Time trade-off (TTO) pairs suffer from a significant right bias where there is nearly a 5% difference (59% vs 54%) in choice probability depending on whether or not the option was presented on the right. The pairs an individual has previously seen also has an influence on future choices (p-value<0.01). Individuals exposed to easier pair choices in a moderate state (one option was preferred 80% of the time) at the beginning of the survey were more likely to exhibit lexicographic preferences for the entire survey than those who were given difficult pair choices with severe health states (these had a 50/50 split) to start (19% vs 15%). Conclusion: It is important for researchers to consider these issues when designing a choice survey, particularly the interpretation of sequence effects. Many of these biases can be reduced or even prevented given a proper design. Recent econometric advancements in choice modelling (i.e. power function, heterogeneity, lexicographic clusters) can also help reduce the effects of heuristics and sequence on values for health outcomes.
