Long COVID – COVID-19 symptoms or sequelae that persist for longer than three months – is a significant public health problem. Marginalised and deprived groups have been shown to be at greater risk of COVID-19 infection and severe disease, but little is known about the relationship between deprivation and long COVID. This project successful extended a New Zealand Ministry of Health funded long COVID registry project by expanding recruitment, increasing the frequency of data collection with respect to the EQ-5D-5L and extending the analysis to explore long COVID inequalities. Mātauranga Raranga | Long COVID Registry Aotearoa was designed in partnership with those with lived experience of long COVID. Comprehensive data are collected from participants in the registry, including the Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD2018) area deprivation score and domain ranks [funded by this grant], and information on symptoms, their severity using symptom scales, self-reported health (SRH) and HRQoL using the EQ-5D-5L. Participants have been followed up monthly using the EQ-5D-5L [funded by this grant] and 6-monthly for symptom scales and other impacts of long COVID. The registry remains open and data collection is ongoing, analyses of collected data as of the end of March 2024 have formed the bases of this final funding report (8.6% Māori; 91.4% non-Māori). Nationally, each IMD2018 Quintile comprises 20% of Aotearoa’s population. In the registry 45% of non-Māori respondents lived in less deprived Quintile 1(Q1) and Q2 areas. The deprivation pattern for Māori respondents is variable, with fewer Q1 (15%) participants, but an overrepresentation in both Q2 and Q5 (25% each). Compared to participants living in Q1 areas, participants in more deprived areas (Q4+Q5) were statistically more likely to have poorer symptoms, particularly for breathlessness, depression, anxiety, psychological distress, fatigue, and stigma. However, there was little or no difference in HRQoL across deprivation Quintiles. The EQ-5D-5L index pre-COVID was 0.856 (0.887) for Māori (non-Māori) respondents; at enrolment with long COVID symptoms the mean value was 0.488 (0.529). The difference in EQ-5D-5L is significant across those two time points. Analysis of the monthly follow-up data shows the disutility associated with long COVID symptoms persists. A recent systematic review to assess the prevalence and symptomology of long COVID found few studies that considered ethnicity and no studies which considered indices of deprivation. This project addresses that evidence gap and additionally explores the relationship between EQ-5D-5L and deprivation. The results suggest a complex relationship between HRQoL and deprivation which is variable for Māori and non-Māori.
