This study aims to address critical gaps in the measurement of health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in children under the age of five by conducting a comprehensive psychometric validation of the EQ-TIPS instrument, including both 3-level and 5-level versions. We will conduct a longitudinal study to assess the feasibility, face validity, known-groups validity, test-retest reliability, and responsiveness of both EQ-TIPS-3L and EQ-TIPS-5L in children aged 0–48 months. For children aged 25–48 months, we will also examine the comparability and potential transition between EQ-TIPS-5L and the proxy version of EQ-5D-Y-5L. In addition, we aim to explore spillover effects on family caregivers by evaluating the psychometric performance, such as known-groups validity, test-retest reliability, and responsiveness of two newly developed EQ-5D-5L bolt-on items (sleep and fatigue) and the EQ-HWB-S. Participants will be recruited from three tertiary hospitals in China across three health condition groups: acute illnesses, chronic conditions, and healthy controls. Caregivers will complete surveys twice with a follow-up interval of 1–3 weeks. The survey questionnaires will include two parts: 1) Child section: EQ-TIPS-3L, EQ-TIPS-5L, proxy EQ VAS, EQ-5D-Y-5L proxy version 1 (only for children aged 25-48 months), a 5-grade overall health assessment (OHA) proxy version, QQ-10 questionnaire, and children’s demographic information; 2) Carer section: carers’ EQ-5D-5L with sleep and fatigue bolt-ons, carers’ EQ VAS, carers’ EQ-HWB-S, and carers’ demographic information. Each clinical condition is selected for its high prevalence and clinical relevance in early childhood, as well as its suitability for stratifying health status by severity. Additionally, to assess face validity, caregivers will complete the QQ-10 questionnaire after completing the EQ-TIPS questionnaire to provide structured feedback on the clarity, relevance, and acceptability of EQ-TIPS. Findings will contribute essential evidence to support the use of EQ-TIPS in early childhood HRQoL assessment and of the EQ-5D-5L bolt-ons and EQ-HWB-S in evaluating caregiver spillover effects. The study data will be shared with the EuroQol Group to support future development and application of these instruments.
