Background: Persons living with dementia (PlwD) make up a growing proportion of the elderly population. Their healthcare use is relatively high, making HRQoL outcomes for healthcare decisions important. Although generic preference-based instruments like the EQ-5D are widely used, there are some specific measurement issues in this patient group. These instruments  may inadequately capture domains relevant to dementia, such as cognition, emotional well-being, and social participation/relationships. Additionally, proxy reporting due to cognitive impairment introduces potential misalignment with patient experiences.Objective: To explore the dimensional coverage of the EQ-5D in assessing HRQoL and the impact of proxy-reporting  in older people living with dementia, comparing self-reported and proxy-reported data.Methods: Using the multinational Actifcare dataset (N=902), which includes both self-reported and proxy-reported HRQoL data from community-dwelling individuals with dementia (n=451) and their carers (n=451), we will conduct exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses (EFA and CFA) to assess the dimensional structure of EQ-5D alongside co-administered instruments (DEMQOL-U, QoL-AD, and ICECAP-O). Subgroup-specific factor analyses will identify structural differences between respondent types (i.e., PlwD vs proxies). Building on these findings, we will apply structural equation modeling (SEM) to quantify the incremental explanatory value of non-EQ-5D dimensions in predicting overall HRQoL, as measured by the EQ VAS. Model fit and statistical significance will be rigorously evaluated using appropriate estimators and nested model comparisons.Relevance to the EuroQol Group: Through our inclusion of an increasingly important older people subgroup and our focus on dimensionality to inform bolt-on selection, this project will directly respond to the DSWG’s call for secondary analyses to explore measurement issues of the EQ-5D in diverse older people subgroups. In addition, this study will provide critical insights into the overlap and differences in dimensional performance of EQ-5D when it is self-reported by PlwD compared to when it is proxy reported by informal carers. Such findings are relevant to inform the selection of potential bolt-ons to use across the spectrum of dementia care (ranging from contexts where self-reported HRQOL is feasible to situations where only proxy reports are feasible).
