Introduction The EuroQol Health and Well-being instrument (EQ-HWB TM) is a new EuroQol instrument for assessing Quality of Life (QoL) outcomes in health, public health, and social care settings. Its conceptual framework is rooted in QoL theory, a multidimensional concept encompassing social, psychological, and physical aspects, which may be influenced by cultural factors. Neither the content validity nor face validity of the experimental version of EQ-HWB has been explored in China (simplified Chinese) or Hong Kong (traditional Chinese). This study addresses this gap by: 1) conducting qualitative interviews with laypeople from China and Hong Kong, respectively, to reveal their QoL conceptual framework and comparing it with the EQ-HWB’s framework to evaluate its adequacy in capturing health and well-being; and 2) examining the understandability of the experimental version of the EQ-HWB. Notably, independent yet coordinated research teams in Mainland China and Hong Kong undertook the exploration of the EQ-HWB’s content and face validity. This separation accounted for linguistic differences (Simplified versus Traditional Chinese) and distinct social contexts. Both teams followed the same protocol and topic guide. The Mainland China team completed their research earlier and provided support and shared experiences to assist the Hong Kong team with data collection and analysis. Methods Quota sampling was employed to recruit respondents from two regions in China, ensuring diversity in age, gender, education, health conditions, and caregiving experience. Targeted respondents were consisted of three target groups: patients with physical or mental illnesses, healthy individuals, and informal caregivers. For each group, we recruited 10 people. Semi-structured qualitative interviews were conducted in four steps: 1) introduction and warm-up questions; 2) exploring the concepts of ‘quality of life,’ ‘health,’ and their interrelationship; 3) using the think-aloud method to complete the EQ-HWB questionnaire and discussing each item using six fixed questions; and 4) using the QQ-10 questionnaire to assess EQ-HWB among patient subgroups. Each interview was transcribed verbatim and analyzed for content validity (steps 1-2) and face validity (step 3). For content validity, two coders analyzed the data using a thematic framework approach. Following each interview, coders refined codes through consensus, excluded irrelevant ones based on predefined criteria, and organized the retained codes into sub-themes and themes, resulting in a Chinese QoL conceptual framework. This QoL framework was then compared with the EQ-HWB conceptual framework (accepted in the 2025 ECR meeting, draft paper attached). For face validity, respondents’ feedback during the think-aloud process and their comments on six specific questions were systematically recorded and analyzed. While both Mainland China and Hong Kong research teams employed the same protocol and steps, there were minor adjustments in implementation. The Mainland China team completed the project earlier and provided training to three Hong Kong interviewers, sharing research background, interview techniques, and experiences. The Hong Kong team conducted five pilot interviews, progressively improving interview quality. Based on pilot findings and collaboration discussions, the Hong Kong team adjusted the interview order by asking about “well-being” before “health” and removed the concept of “quality of life” to reduce potential confusion and response bias. Despite these refinements, both teams adhered to the same quota sampling criteria and core interview steps. Results Each of the two research teams recruited 30 respondents to achieve the criteria of quota sampling respectively. The results of content and face validity from two research team were reported below with the order of mainland China to Hong Kong. Both the mainland China and Hong Kong teams conducted content validity studies with 30 participants each, reaching data saturation. The mainland team identified 189 codes forming eight domains—feeling and emotion, cognition, self-identity, coping, physical sensation, relationship, activity, and a newly emerged “mindset,” which was absent from the original EQ-HWB framework. Similarly, the Hong Kong team identified seven main domains aligning with the EQ-HWB, and also found “mindset” as an inductive theme, reflecting introspective thinking and the dynamic interplay between personal health and the social environment. Face validity analysis revealed that while some items (e.g., items 5, 10, and 20 in Hong Kong; items 6 and 23 in mainland China) received no comments, several items (especially items 18, 19, 17, and 13) generated the most feedback, mainly concerning clarity, relevance, and response scale confusion. Respondents had difficulty distinguishing between similar items (e.g., items 9 and 19) and interpreting severity vs. frequency levels. Minor issues were noted for several other items, offering insights into wording, cultural fit, and potential social desirability bias. Conclusion The mainland China and Hong Kong research have similar results of generating QoL framework. The QoL framework revealed a unique theme, ‘mindset,’ potentially reflecting Chinese cultural characteristics and demonstrated that the EQ-HWB’s conceptual framework is well-represented within this QoL framework. These findings support the content validity of the EQ-HWB. Regarding face validity, the results suggest that while several items of the EQ-HWB were well-understood by respondents, others highlighted the importance of reviewing item translation and cultural nuances to ensure clarity in interpretation. See the attached file with two tables summarizing the face validity and content validity results in Hong Kong and China.
