Background: HRQOL (Health-Related Quality of Life) is becoming an important research topic for evaluating the impact of diseases on daily life in children and adolescents. The EQ-5D-Y (Youth Version) is a child-friendly, generic self-complete questionnaire that assesses HRQoL in children and adolescents from 8 to 15 years. There is growing interest in using HRQoL instruments in clinical practice to help detect health problems, as well as monitor changes in health over time and in patient decision-making including treatment decisions. As a result, it is important to critically evaluate the psychometric properties of new or updated HRQoL tools in different children health conditions prior to their widespread use. As far as we know, that there are no studies evaluating the psychometric properties of the Arabic version of the EQ-5D-Y to date. Aim: The aim of this study is to investigate the psychometric properties (validity, feasibility, reliability, and redistribution properties) of the Arabic version of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and the EQ-5D-Y-5L in children and adolescents with different health conditions in Egypt.Methods: Egyptian children between the ages of 12-15 who are healthy school children or with a chronic health condition (either diabetes or cancer) were eligible for recruitment. Children in all groups whose parents signed the consent were asked to self-complete the EQ-5D-Y-5L, PEDsQL, sociodemographic questions and the EQ-5D-Y-3L paper-based questionnaires. Since we used the self-administered version of the EQ-5D-Y questionnaires, we chose to recruit children between 12 and 15 to ensure that they were able to read and understand the questions without assistance. All children were asked to complete the questionnaires for the second time after 1-2 weeks to assess the test-retest reliability. Performance of both EQ-5D-Y Arabic versions was studiedthrough comparing feasibility, reliability, redistribution properties, and validity.Results: The Standard Arabic version of the EQ-5D-Y-5L was produced according to the EuroQol translation guidelines, with clear and appropriate severity qualifiers for the dimensions' levels that enabled children to differentiate between them in severity. The feasibility of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L Arabic versions was confirmed by the absence of missing responses and a reasonable completion time of less than 5 minutes, with superiority of the EQ-5D-Y-5L according to children's preferences. There was a significant reduction (19.4%) of ceiling effect across all five dimensions (11111) from the EQ-5D-Y-3L to the EQ-5D-Y-5L. There was a significant moderate to strong correlation between dimensions of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L with related PedsQL items, supporting the convergent validity. The strong known-group discriminatory ability has been observed for the EQ-5D-Y-3L/5L LSS across groups known to have worse or better health states, depending on the VAS and PedsQL cut-off points. Additionally, there was a significant difference in EQ-5D-Y-3L/5L LSS and VAS scores between different health conditions. The inconsistent responses seen between the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L dimensions ranged from 1.8% for 'looking after myself' to 7.7% for 'worried, sad, or unhappy' dimensions. There was a significant moderate to substantial agreement across the dimensions of EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L, confirming the test-retest reliability. Also, the level sum scores of both versions and the VAS score showed excellent reliability ICC > 0.7. The VAS score showed good responsiveness to health improvements over time, as there was a significant improvement in the VAS score with a medium effect size among those with improved health. As per the nature of the chosen health conditions (type 1 diabetes and cancer), the number of participants who completed the second visit and reported significant changes in their health conditions was too small to make a meaningful conclusion about responsiveness at the dimension level, so future studies should be specifically designed to assess responsiveness.
