Abstract: Purpose: Patients with complex care needs are vulnerable to poor quality care and adverse health outcomes, and incur substantial costs for the health care system. A key to improving the outcomes for high-cost users (HCUs) is being able to accurately predict who will become a HCU before they have incurred substantial, avoidable costs. Data on self-reported health status may improve predictions about who will become a HCU. The objectives of this study are to: 1) develop models to predict individuals at risk of becoming future HCUs, and 2) compare the performance of predictive models with and without EQ-5D-5L data. Methods: We used data from respondents to two PCM surveys conducted in British Columbia, Canada (acute inpatient survey and emergency department survey) and linked health administrative data. Our outcome of interest was becoming a high-cost user (HCU) in the year following completion of a PCM survey. We conducted person-level costing following best practice guidelines for costing using British Columbia administrative databases and identified cost thresholds for HCUs, defined as those incurring costs in the 5th percentile and above among those with non-zero costs. We developed two sets of predictors, including a ‘standard’ set consisting of demographic, clinical, and resource use and cost predictors and an ‘enhanced’ set which added in EQ-5D-5L data. We imputed missing data using multiple imputation with chain equations, and compared five types of models, including 1) logistic regression, 2) least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO), 3) elastic-net, 4) random forests, and 5) artificial neural network (ANN). Ten-fold cross-validation was used to assess how our results would generalize to an independent dataset. We assessed model performance based on discriminative ability (area under the receiver operating characteristics curve (AUROC), cost capture) calibration (calibration curve), and clinical usefulness (decision curve analysis). We also identified which predictors were most important to model performance (relative importance analysis). Results: Using administrative data from over 5 million British Columbians, we found that approximately 40% of the population incurs no health care costs, while the top 5% incur 63% of health care expenditures and the top 1% incur 33% of health care expenditures. The final sample size was 11,964 for the inpatient care survey and 11,144 for the emergency department survey. Broadly speaking, discrimination was similar across model types (e.g., logistic versus LASSO), while the addition of EQ-5D-5L data improved discrimination. This improvement in AUROC curve was small, for example increasing from 0.80 (95% CI: 0.79-0.81) to 0.81 (95% CI: 0.80-0.82) for the logistic regression model from the emergency department survey. However, this effect was more substantial for cost capture, with an increase from 0.36 (95% CI: 0.33-0.39) to 0.41 (95% CI: 0.38-0.45). Overall, models were well calibrated. The decision curve analysis demonstrated that the enhanced models with EQ-5D-5L data provided the highest net benefit across a wide range of thresholds. The relative importance analysis found that for the inpatient care survey the EQ-5D-5L VAS was the among the most important predictors. For the emergency department survey, the usual activities and self-care dimensions were amongst the most important variables. Conclusion: Using routinely collected EQ-5D-5L data from British Columbians discharged from either inpatient care or emergency departments and administrative data, were found that models to predict subsequent HCUs demonstrated good discrimination and calibration. The addition of EQ-5D-5L data improved discriminative performance, particularly on cost capture, meaning that models were better able to predict the individuals with the highest health care costs. Prediction models using EQ-5D-5L data have the potential to identify individuals who could benefit from supports to improve outcomes and reduce health care costs.
