Background The EQ-5D-5L and EQ-5D-Y-5L are designed to measure health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in adults and younger populations, respectively. The EQ-5D-Y-5L maintains the same five dimensions as the EQ-5D-5L but uses child-friendly wording. Together, they enable consistent HRQoL measurement from childhood to adulthood. However, the user guide for the EQ-5D-Y-5L suggests that both the youth and adult EQ-5D instruments can be used in ages 12–15 years, while the adult version may be preferred for 16 years and above, but if all respondents are 18 or below, using youth instrument alone is preferred. Comparability of the two versions in adolescents aged 12–18 years with different health conditions remains inadequately known. Aims The study aims to generate evidence to inform the transition between the EQ-5D-5L and EQ-5D-Y-5L in adolescents aged 12–18 years with atopic dermatitis (AD) or mental health problems (MHP), by examining their relationship in terms of response distributions and psychometric properties including construct validity, test–retest reliability, responsiveness and agreement.  Methods We aim to recruit 600 adolescents aged 12–18 years with AD or MHP from the Dermatology Hospital of Southern Medical University (Guangzhou, China) and Shanghai Mental Health Center (Shanghai, China). Baseline data will be collected upon consent taking. Test–retest assessment will occur 2–5 days after baseline. For responsiveness assessment, AD patients will be reassessed 12 weeks post-baseline, and MHP patients will be reassessed 4 weeks post-baseline, in line with the typical time for the treatment regimens to take effect. Trained university students or nurses will collect data in clinics and wards using electronic devices. At baseline, participants will self-complete EQ-5D-5L, EQ-5D-Y-5L, either the Children’s Dermatology Life Quality Index (CDLQI; for AD patients) or the Warwick–Edinburgh Mental Well-being Scale (WEMWBS for MHP patients), and a single item self-rated health (SRH); followed by demographic questions. The order of EQ-5D-5L and EQ-5D-Y-5L will be randomized. At follow-up, participants will self-complete the EQ-5D-5L, EQ-5D-Y-5L, and SRH, with the order of EQ-5D-5L and EQ-5D-Y-5L randomized. In addition, we will extract clinical information from medical records, including diagnosis, disease duration, treatment, comorbidities, and severity scores: the Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI) for AD, the Hamilton Anxiety (HAM-A) and Depression (HAM-D) Rating Scales for MHP. Response distributions and psychometric properties will be compared between EQ-5D-5L and EQ-5D-Y-5L. Response distribution analyses will include ceiling and floor effects, redistribution, and informativity. Psychometric comparison will include convergent validity, known-group validity, agreement, test–retest reliability, and responsiveness.
