DCE with duration has been approved as an experimental valuation protocol by the EuroQol’s Executive Committee. Nonlinear DCE modelling methods are also a desirable feature in the implementation of such a protocol. A key appeal of using DCE methods, is the ability to collect data online, with potentially lower cost implications compared to cTTO. However, there remains concerns about the quality of DCE data, especially given common issues with bots and disengaged respondents in online administration formats.This study aims to address these issues by developing a set of quality checks and criteria that can be universally applied when conducting online valuation studies using DCE with duration, especially with a nonlinear DCE modelling method. This will be conducted in the context of the EQ-5D-5L using Australia as a case study.The study will have two components; part A and B. Part A will develop a comprehensive list of quality criteria/checks for testing. This will involve consultation with relevant stakeholders  and a scoping review for relevant health state valuation studies on online data quality. Part B will test the list of quality criteria developed and two different online administration modes. There will be 4 arms of data collection. The first 3 arms will be using a standard online survey format with respondents sourced from 3 different online panel providers and the 4th arm will be online collection via supervised Zoom group sessions. 3000 respondents will be collected for the first DCE design update with no quality criteria applied. This large sample will be used to test the quality criteria created in Stage A and establish a list of criteria to apply to the rest of the data collection.Results from this study will inform the EuroQol Group of the feasibility of conducting online DCE valuation studies and answer key questions such as whether a standard DCE administration mode i.e. online survey, with quality checks is sufficient for quality responses or whether more stringent online or other modes of administration are required.
