Introduction: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin condition impacting quality of life, with itch identified as the main symptom affecting daily life. EQ-5D measures are widely used to assess the impact of treatments and conditions on health-related quality of life, but they may not perform well in all conditions due to their brevity and generic nature. Bolt-on versions, such as the EQ-PSO, may improve their performance in certain conditions. This study assesses the psychometric performance of the EQ-5D-5L, EQ-PSO, EQ-PSO+sleep in AD patients. Methods: An online survey in the UK and Germany was administered to 306 adults with moderate-to-severe AD, collecting POEM, DLQI and EQ-PSO+sleep. Convergent validity was analysed by evaluating the item and sum score correlations between the different versions of the EQ-5D (EQ-5D-5L, EQ-PSO and EQ-PSO+sleep) and two condition-specific measures (DLQI and POEM). Hierarchical models evaluated the explanatory power of EQ-5D-5L, EQ-PSO and EQ-PSO+sleep to predict EQ-VAS, DLQI and POEM scores. Known-group validity was assessed using ANOVA to test whether the EQ-5D-5L, EQ-PSO and EQ-PSO+sleep level sum scores (LSSs) distinguish between known groups defined by POEM severity categories. Factor analysis was conducted to examine the structural validity of the EQ-PSO and the impact of the addition of sleep. Results: The EQ-5D-5L showed good convergent validity, correlating strongly with both condition specific measures. Convergent validity was better between the two EQ bolt-on versions and the POEM, but not between bolt-on versions and the DLQI. The bolt-on versions improved the explanatory power of the EQ-5D-5L, when predicting POEM and VAS scores, but not the DLQI. All EQ measures could distinguish between known groups defined by POEM severity categories, with bolt-on versions performing better than EQ-5D-5L. Conclusion: While the EQ-5D-5L performed acceptably in AD, the EQ-PSO and EQ-PSO+sleep offered improvements in psychometric performance over the EQ-5D-5L, capturing symptom severity and QoL impairments specific to AD.
