IntroductionChronic Urticaria (CU), characterised by hives and angioedema, can be spontaneous (CSU) or inducible (CIndU). Previous research has reported a substantial impact of CU on health-related quality of life (HRQL). However, research has also shown substantial ceiling effects in the EQ-5D-5L in chronic dermatological conditions. This study aimed to assess whether four existing bolt-ons can improve the EQ-5D-5L’s psychometric properties in CU.MethodsAn online survey was conducted (August-September 2025) with adults with CU, based in the United States. This included the EQ-5D-5L and four bolt-ons (skin irritation and self-confidence from the experimental EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox and two previously developed bolt-ons: sleep and social relationships). The survey also included some condition-specific measures: Chronic Urticaria Quality of Life Questionnaire (CU-Q2oL), Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) and the Urticaria Control Test (UCT). Analyses explored the distribution of bolt-on responses and EQ-5D-5L ceiling reduction with bolt-ons. Known-groups discrimination by UCT disease control status and hives presence on the day of survey completion was investigated. Convergent validity between bolt-ons and items or total scores of condition-specific measures (CU-Q2oL, DLQI) and divergent validity between bolt-ons and EQ-5D-5L dimensions were also assessed.ResultsThe final sample (N=189; 77% completion rate), were 85% (n=161) female, 13% (n=25) non-white, and on average 40 years old (range: 20-72 years). Representative of the population, 60% (n=113) had CSU, 22% (n=41) CIndU, and 19% (n=35) had both.Of the five EQ-5D-5L and four bolt-on dimensions, problems were most frequently reported for skin irritation (n=168, 89%), and least frequently for self-care (n=46, 24%). Notably, n=28 (15%) reported problems on skin irritation and no problems on pain or discomfort. Full health on the EQ-5D-5L was reported by n=23 (12%), indicating no ceiling effect. The addition of any bolt-on reduced the EQ-5D-5L’s ceiling, however the largest absolute reduction was observed for skin irritation (9%-points).EQ-5D-5L level sum scores (LSS) were not significantly different when comparing those with current hives to those without hives. However, the addition of skin irritation yielded statistically significant group difference (p=0.036). The EQ-5D-5L with bolt-ons effectively discriminated between poorly and well controlled disease (UCT). The addition of the skin irritation item in particular increased efficiency approximately fourfold (RE=3.96), which was further increased (RE=5.02) when both skin-irritation and self-confidence bolt-ons were included. The EQ-5D-5L LSS had weak to moderate positive correlations with the DLQI (0.16) and CU-Q2oL total scores (0.32). The addition of any bolt-on increased the strength of correlations, and skin irritation had the largest impact (increasing the correlation coefficient to r=0.27 (DLQI) and r=0.42 (CU-Q2OL), respectively). No strong correlations (≥0.5) were observed between any bolt-ons and EQ-5D-5L dimensions, suggesting divergent validity. ConclusionThe skin irritation bolt-on from the experimental EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox had the greatest impact on the EQ-5D-5L’s measurement properties, supporting its addition for this population. Some evidence was shown for the inclusion of further bolt-ons; however, these did not notably improve the EQ-5D-5L’s measurement properties in CU.
