This travel grant application sought funding support for an accepted abstract as part of Jan Faller’s EuroQol funded PhD study (1481-PHD). This was presented at the 2024 European Health Economics Association (EuHEA) Conference held in Vienna, Austria from 1-3 July 2024. Jan’s PhD programme aims to address methodological issues concerning the inclusion of informal carer outcomes in economic evaluations, particularly using the EQ-5D tools. Jan’s accepted presentation was titled: How well do generic preference-based measures perform in informal carers: a psychometric study in Australia. The study reported findings on the performance of the EQ-5D-5L and the AQoL-8D in terms of convergent validity, known-groups, ceiling effects and test-retest reliability. Furthermore, the conceptual overlap between the generic preference-based measures and carer-specific measures (CarerQoL, ASCOT-Carer, and the Carer Experience Scale) was also presented. The study concluded that both the EQ-5D-5L and AQoL-8D were valid generic preference-based measures for use in the informal carer population. Questions were also fielded after the presentation along with further discussions among the attendees. Outside of the presentation, Jan was also able to attend a pre-conference workshop titled: “Choice Modelling in Health: Eliciting and Modelling Stated Preferences for Health Interventions” delivered by Professor Esther de Bekker-Grob and Associate Professor Jorien Veldwijk of the Erasmus Choice Modelling Centre. The workshop aimed to help participants to familiarize ourselves with the steps of conducting a stated preference study and modelling choice data. Learnings from this workshop will be valuable for the subsequent studies of Jan’s PhD programme. During the conference, Jan was able to also network with Professor Hareth Al-Janabi, a leading researcher in the informal carer field. Jan and Professor Al-Janabi discussed the potential collaboration in future research as he had similar areas of interests with Jan and PhD supervisor Lidia Engel.
