Due to the aging population and changes in the morbidity structure, health-related quality of life (HRQoL) measurement in the elderly gets more relevant. However, special characteristics of the elderly population, such as impaired cognitive functioning or visual impairments, seem to make an accurate measurement of HRQoL challenging. The EQ-5D is a widely used generic preference-based instrument, which is psychometrically sound with the general population, but it may not be suitable for use in elderly. Therefore, we need to examine whether the EQ-5D is a feasible measure applicable for the use in the elderly population. Hence, this study aims to systematically identify and analyse the available literature which examined feasibility properties of the EQ-5D specifically for the elderly. We conducted a systematic search in the PubMed, PsycInfo and the EuroQol database to identify articles published in English or German without any restrictions to the publication date. Studies were included, if (1) the minimum age of the sample was reported and included participants were at least 65 years old and (2) HRQoL as a primary or secondary outcome was measured by the EQ-5D. Two independent reviewers conducted the literature sifting process. We extracted the sample and study characteristics, including outcomes referring to the feasibility of the EQ-5D as a measure of HRQoL in the elderly in a qualitative synthesis. We identified 15 studies reporting information on feasibility based on four criteria: missing values, completion rates, time required to complete the instrument and -more broadly –qualitative statements referring to the completion of the measure. Only two of the included studies examined the EQ-5D-5L, the remaining 13 reported on the 3L version. Our findings suggest that missing values or comprehension problems (especially with the VAS) are slightly more prevalent in older age groups. However, these aspects are well within an acceptable range and still considerably lower than in other measures such as the SF-36 or ICECAP-O, which are frequently used in the elderly. Furthermore, older respondents seem to have a higher propensity of requiring some degree of assistance or even an interviewer-based approach, but still on a quite low level.Overall, evidence from the reviewed literature indicates that the EQ-5D is a comprehensible and short measure, which is also highly applicable in older respondents. The EQ-5D is a well-established instrument used to measure and evaluate health-related quality of life. Both versions the EQ-5D-3L and 5L demonstrated good measurement properties across many conditions and populations, strengthening the EQ-5D’s role as a basis for calculating quality-adjusted life years for use in clinical and economic evaluations. In the light of an aging population, the EQ-5D also showed adequate measurement properties in the elderly population. When evaluating healthcare services for elderly people, the measure should also be feasible and applicable to the use in an elderly population. The ease of applying the EQ-5D in an elderly sample may have an impact on data quality given that feasibility issues increase the risk of measurement error, i.e. missing responses ormulti-coded answers, or even complete study withdrawal. Yet, little is known about these properties of the EQ-5D in this population. This study aims to examine the feasibility of the EQ-5D-3L and 5L in the elderly general population by exploring the impact of age on the completion of the EQ-5D instruments further controlling for gender and the presence of long-term conditions. A prerequisite for this analysis is the availability of uncleansed, self-report EQ-5D health data from the general population. We pool across five waves of secondary datasets from the GP Patient Survey from years 2012, 2016 and 2017, where respondents self-report their health in either EQ-5D-3L or 5L depending on the wave of fieldwork. First, descriptive analysis was undertaken to analyse the distribution and proportion of missing values and completion rates stratified by age and EQ-5D version. Secondly, logistic regression models were specified to quantify the impact of age, gender and potential long-term conditions on the completion of each of the EQ-5D instruments. The total sample comprises around 4.36 million observations, of which 2.88 million respondents report their health in 5L and 1.47 million in 3L, respectively. Respondents being 65 years and above have marginally more missing values in each dimension compared to younger respondents. The highest share was observed for the oldest age group in the dimension anxiety/depression (3L 9.1% vs. 5L 7.6%), otherwise being below 5%. Consequently, completion rates (observed and predicted) decreased with age and at a higher rate after the age of 64. Evidence from our study suggests that both the EQ-5D-3L and 5L have good feasibility properties. The proportion of missing values is acceptably low across all age groups but compares more favourably for the 5LGiven the ongoing ageing trend in European countries, we expect a major increase in the proportion of elderly people with a corresponding increase in long-term care needs. While in Europe the majority of long-term care is provided by informal caregivers in a home-based setting, little is known about the impact of different care settings on the (health-related) quality of life (HRQoL) of care-dependents. Hence, this study aims to assess differences in (HR)QoL between elderly respondents receiving informal care and elderly respondents receiving formal care based on EQ-5D-3L, 5L and the age-specific WHOQOL-old. In addition to that, we aim to add to the scarce evidence of the EQ-5D’s feasibility and test-retest properties in the elderly population. Our findings suggest that differences in (HR)QoL between different care settings seem indeed to be prevalent, pointing towards higher levels of reported (HR)QoL in recipients of formal care and those in a nursing homes. Generally, the EQ-5D shows good properties in terms of response distribution, feasibility and test-retest statistics and this is irrespective of the version. Moreover, we conclude that using the WHOQOL-old alongside EQ-5D in this sample added further information ondifferent aspects of QoL from care-dependents.The EQ-5D is one of the most prominent instruments for the measurement and valuation of health-related quality of life. Due to its generic descriptive system it can be used to measure health across different disease areas and age groups. Given the growing demand of HRQoL data for clinical and economic appraisal targeted at the elderly age group the EQ-5D was extensively used in this population, too. Reference values are a helpful tool to facilitate comparisons against other groups. For example, to assess disease burden of patients, for researchers as baseline or control measurement or to determine the effects of treatments. In order to generate reference values for the German elderly population (≥65 years), we analysed a sub-set of data from the German valuation study to present benchmark values for mean utilities and VAS values as well as with regard to the response distribution stratified by age and gender. Instead of using only two age groups to characterise the elderly population, we used four age groups (65-69, 70-74, 75-79 and >79 years) to facilitate a more detailed examination of age-related HRQoL. Generally, our findings correspond well to earlier findings from a large German population norm study. Nonetheless, a more detailed provision of reference values for the elderly population seems helpful given that HRQoL in the oldest old is more volatile and differs from the young elderly, while the sought age categorisation of conventional population norms studies seems to mask these differences. Our findings may help researchers, clinicians and health economists to compare their results with those of the German general elderly population.
