IntroductionThe EQ-5D-5L and EQ-5D-Y-3L descriptive systems share the same five dimensions. However, they differ in terms of their wording of dimensions (e.g. Anxiety/Depression versus Worried, Sad or Unhappy), number of response levels, and level descriptors e.g for the worst level, “extreme”/”unable to”  in the 5L versus “a lot”/”cannot” in the Y-3L. Value sets for EQ-5D-Y-3L also have different properties compared to EQ-5D-5L value sets: Y-3L value sets are generally observed to have higher minimum values; contain a lower proportion of values < 0; and have a different order of dimension importance, compared to corresponding 5L value sets. These discrepancies may affect longitudinal HRQoL assessments in patients transitioning between the youth instrument and adult instrument, potentially leading to changes in index values without any change in underlying health. Systematic differences in measurement and values between age-specific instruments also raise potential concerns about the comparability of QALYs (e.g. in HTA) derived from youth and adult instruments. This study investigates whether these differences in value set characteristics and descriptive systems for the adult and youth instruments lead to overall differences in HRQoL (i.e. index values) when transitioning between them.MethodsWe pooled 4 datasets containing EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-5L responses  from the same respondents: a sample of South African children aged 12-19, half of which had a known condition (n=624); a sample of Australian children aged 12-18 with known conditions (n=591); and two general population young adult (ages <25) samples from the Netherlands (n=203) and Hungary (n=125). We report the distribution of responses for both instruments, and applied value sets to the response data, for the 10 countries that both have an EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-5L value set (dyads). The difference between index values was compared between the instruments, for each dyad. ResultsCeiling effects were high and similar between the two instruments for all dimensions except anxiety or depression/worried, sad or unhappy. EQ-5D-Y-3L level 2 responses translated to levels 1-3 responses in EQ-5D-5L in 96% of cases. EQ-5D-Y-3L level 3 responses translated to level 3-5 responses on the EQ-5D-5L in 80% of cases. The differences in index values between EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-5L were normally distributed but varied by country. Using EQ-5D-5L to report their own health led to higher index values using the value sets of 2 countries compared to their corresponding value on the EQ-5D-Y-3L (Indonesia and Japan; mean difference of 0.079 and 0.052, respectively). For the Netherlands and China, no difference was found. For the remaining countries (Australia, Belgium, Germany, Hungary, Slovenia and Spain), the use of the EQ-5D-5L instrument led to lower index values on average (0.052, 0.043, 0.078, 0.056, 0.077 and 0.068 respectively). DiscussionWe found differences in index values for the same respondent depending on whether EQ-5D-Y-3L or EQ-5D-5L was used. In 2 out of the 3 Asian countries, using EQ-5D-Y-3L led to lower index values for the same respondent, while for 5 of the European countries and Australia, the opposite was true. While the mean difference was smaller than 0.1 for all countries, overall the results suggest an effect of moderate size. This suggests that these differences in index values could lead to a substantial difference in QALYs accrued over multiple years for some value set dyads, although for 2 out of 10 value set dyads, the difference was negligible. Our sample contained more respondents with mild health problems, and further testing in more severe samples may be warranted.
