Background and aim: Climate change presents a major public health concern globally. Extreme weather events and related climate change impacts including extreme heat, cyclones, bushfires, floods, and droughts have become more frequent and intense, posing significant challenges to global health. As health risks from climate change increase, understanding the appropriateness of using health-related quality of life (HRQoL) measures such as EQ-5D to evaluate the health impact associated with climate change is important. This systematic review will describe the extent to which EQ-5D and other HRQoL measures have been used in the evaluation of HRQoL and assess their measurement properties, in the context of climate change, focusing on the health impacts of extreme heat, cyclones, bushfires, floods, and droughts.  Methods: This review will consider studies published from January 1990 to January 2024. Databases such as MEDLINE, the Cochrane Library, Scopus, and Web of Science will be searched for relevant literature. The review process will adhere to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Generic HRQoL measures, including both preference-based and non-preference-based instruments for use in adult and youth populations, will be considered, and their measurement properties will be summarized in terms of feasibility, validity, sensitivity, and reliability. Results: The review is expected to identify how the EQ-5D and other generic HRQoL measures have been implemented and what evidence exists concerning their measurement properties in the evaluation of HRQoL that could be impacted by climate change extreme weather-related event across different populations and settings. Conclusion: This systematic review aims to provide a better understanding of the appropriateness of using EQ-5D in the context of climate change. It will identify strengths and limitations in the current implementation of EQ-5D compared to other generic HRQoL measures and offer insights into developing a more robust EQ-5D instrument.
