PCR174 VALUATION OF THE EQ-5D-3L IN JORDAN Al Rabayah AA,1 Purba F,2 Rencz F,3 Roudijk B,4 Jaddoua S,5 Siebert U6 1King Hussein Cancer Center, UMIT - University for Health Sciences, Medical Informatics and Technology, Institute of Public Health, Medical Decision Making and Health Technology Assessment, Hall in Tirol, Austria, Hall in Tirol, Austria, 2Faculty of Psychology, Padjadjaran University, West Java, Indonesia, 3Department of Health Policy, Corvinus University of Budapest, Budapest, Hungary, 4EuroQol Research Foundation, Rotterdam, ZH, Netherlands, 5King Hussein Cancer Center, Amman, Jordan, 6UMIT - University for Health Sciences, Medical Informatics and Technology, Hall i.T., Austria. ONCOTYROL - Center for Personalized Cancer Medicine, Innsbruck, Austria. Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA Objectives: Cost-utility analysis is an important tool for health technology assessment and decision-making about health technologies in Jordan, however no national value set is available for any preference-accompanied health utility measure. To develop a value set for EQ-5D-3L based on the preferences of the Jordanian population. Methods: A representative sample of the Jordanian general population was obtained in 2021 through stratified quota sampling involving age, gender and region. Participants aged above 18 years, were interviewed by online videoconferencing using the EuroQol Valuation Tech- nology web based LimeSurvey. Four trained interviewers completed data collection. The data were closely monitored through the QC protocol of Euro- QoL. Participants completed 10 composite time trade-off (cTTO) and 10 discrete choice experiments (DCE) tasks. In addition, participants completed the feed- back module. Values for the EQ-5D-3L health states were estimated using regression modeling. The cTTO and DCE data were analyzed using linear and logistic regression modeling, and hybrid models combining the DCE and cTTO data. Results: A total of 301 participants with complete data were included in the analysis. Only one interview was flagged. All regression models showed both logical consistency and significance with respect to the parameter estimates. The hybrid model corrected for heteroskedasticity was selected as it included data from both the cTTO and the DCE tasks which provided a comprehensive value set. Utility decrements due to mobility had the highest weight followed by anxiety and depression. The lowest weight was assigned to usual activities. Conclusions: This study provides values for EQ-5D-3L health states for the Jordanian population. This value set can be used in health technology assessments for health policy planning by the Jordanian health sector’s decision makers.
