Objectives Prior research has shown that the composite time trade-off (cTTO) utilities vary with perspectives as adults tend to assign lower utilities to severe health states when they value health states for themselves (self-perspective) compared to valuing health states for children (proxy perspective). Utilities may also depend on the exact framing of the proxy perspective, i.e., whether adult respondents decide for a child (proxy 1 perspective) or when they imagine what a child wants (proxy 2 perspective). Such discrepancies may lead to health states being better than dead (BTD) under one perspective, yet worse than dead (WTD) under another. It has been suggested that unwillingness to trade-off life years for children explains these results, yet this would only affect methods that include duration (i.e., cTTO). We investigate whether the (inclusion of) duration of health states influences individuals’ propensity to value a health state WTD or BTD when taking different perspectives. We also explore the relation between religious beliefs and the willingness to consider states WTD. Methods We integrated ranking tasks with a paired comparison task, employing the BTD method (i.e., respondents were asked to choose between a health state lasting for a specific time and death) in an online sample recruited from the UK public through Prolific. To capture a wide range of beliefs about the afterlife, participants were sampled in groups of equal size on whether they were religious or not and asked about attitudes towards death and euthanasia. These discrete choices were contextualized with 3 different perspectives (adult-own, proxy 1 and proxy 2), 5 different health states described in terms of the EuroQol EQ-5D-Y-3L classification system (21111, 22222, 23333, 33323, and 33333) and 4 different durations (1 year, 5 years, 10 years, and 20 years). Results Our results indicate that in the ranking task without duration, there is no difference in valuing severe health states WTD, regardless of perspective or religious belief. Within the paired comparison task, increasing the duration leads to a substantial rise in the percentage of participants who consider severe health states WTD across all perspectives, with a notably higher tendency in the non-religious group. We confirm the previous finding that health states are more favored over death in proxy 1 than in the self-perspective in both groups. We also observe that people are more likely to choose death over a health state when they agree more with euthanasia and when durations are longer (10 and 20 years). Religious beliefs are found to have a negative significant correlation with choosing health states WTD. Conclusion Overall, duration, religion and opinions on euthanasia influence tendencies to value a health state being BTD or WTD under both self and proxy perspectives. QALY anchored utility may be duration dependent and future research is encouraged to take into account religion in sampling.
