Background and aims: The EQ-5D-5L “anxiety/depression” (A/D) dimension is a composite dimension. The forced single response relies on the respondent's ability to endorse a response option when the levels of the anxiety and depression problems, taken apart, may differ. The aims of this study were to investigate the relationship between the composite A/D dimension, separate anxiety (here referred to as “A dimension”) and depression (here referred to as “D dimension”) dimensions and anxiety and depression symptoms as measured with the Generalized Anxiety Disorder–7 (GAD-7) and Patient Health Questionnaire–9 (PHQ-9) respectively. Methods: This study is a secondary data-analysis of data from the POPCORN study. The data were collected using a web-based survey among general population samples from nine countries. The primary outcome measures of our study were the EQ-5D-5L A/D, A and D dimension level scores (5L) and the PHQ-9 and GAD-7 (sum)score. In part 1 of the analysis, we examined the frequency of reported problems on the composite A/D dimension and A and D dimensions. We used Spearman rank correlation coefficients to examine the strength of association between the A/D dimension and the A and D dimension and the GAD-7 and the PHQ-9 score. In part 2 of the study, we calculated the performance of the A/D dimension using the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (AUROC) and compared to having anxiety (GAD-7≥8), depression (PHQ-9≥10) and both versus none for the total population and sub-groups. Results: Of the 23,622 respondents, 48.7% reported problems on the standard A/D dimension, versus 46.4% on the A dimension and 34.8% on the D dimension if presented separately. A total of 15.7% gave non-consistent answers on the A/D dimension versus the separate A and D dimensions. Spearman rank correlation coefficients of the A/D dimension and A and D dimensions were 0.712 and 0.657, respectively. The performance of the A/D dimension in the total sample was good (AUROC>0.8) and did not differ significantly between diagnostic groups. The performance differed significantly between the age groups, with worse performance in the younger groups, and differed between those with a singular chronic condition, with worse performance in those indicating having an anxiety or depression disorder. The performance did not differ significantly by gender, education, nor total chronic conditions. Conclusions: The combined EQ-5D-5L A/D response is consistent with A and D dimension if presented separately. Convergent validity between the AD, A and D dimension and the GAD-7 and the PHQ-9 score was high. The A/D dimension captures symptoms of anxiety, depression or both equally well. Performance is worse in the younger population.
