This study explored how the general public and people with physical/mental health problems use and interpret the EQ-VAS in a low-income country setting (Ethiopia). In-depth interviews were conducted with 15 individuals from the general public and 30 from a hospital setting, evenly split between physical (heart failure and/or hypertension) and mental health conditions (anxiety and/or depression). Separate content analyses were conducted for each participant group. The findings from each of the three participant groups were then compared using cross-case analysis. Key findings were categorised into four codes, exploring views towards (1) ease of completion, (2) interpretation of health, (3) representation of a meaningful change on the 0-100 scale, and (4) understanding of best/worst imaginable health states. The majority of the general public found completing the EQ-VAS challenging due to lack of explanations for the scale’s numbers. In contrast, the majority of participants with a health condition found it straightforward. General public often used past health as a benchmark and referred to past health conditions, work capacity, and social interaction, while those with physical or mental health problems focused on their current health and use of medication. Respondents suggested using 5- or 10-point hash marks over the current 1-point, which also reflected respondents’ interpretation of a meaningful change on the EQ-VAS. Participants with a physical health problem found that a change in health would correspond to a 5-point change on EQ-VAS, while those with a mental health problem suggested a 10-point change. The best health state for the general public involves being disease-free, financially stable, in full health, and having a healthy family. Individuals with physical and mental health problems often interpret it as full health or stable income, capability to work, and having a happier, pain- or disease-free life. The worst imaginable health state for the general public included being severely sick or having mental health problems. Those with cardiovascular issues often saw it as being bedridden, while individuals with mental health problems interpreted it as being unconscious. Achieving the best health state was considered unattainable by a few participants, with death infrequently mentioned as the worst imaginable health state. This study provided further evidence related to the interpretation of the EQ-VAS and underscores the necessity for explanations of numbers. Further quantitative research is needed to examine what denotes a meaningful change in EQ-VAS across different disease areas.
