Introduction: Long-term care for frail older adults represents an increasing challenge in the context of global population aging, with substantial implications for healthcare systems and resource allocation. Frailty is a multifactorial geriatric syndrome characterized by the accumulation of physiological deficits and diminished homeostatic reserve, leading to heightened vulnerability to adverse outcomes such as hospitalization, complications, institutionalization, and mortality. The hospital-to-home transition is a critical period, often influencing health outcomes and quality of life, and is frequently associated with readmissions. Health-related quality of life instruments generally assess limited range of health dimensions and often fail to encompass domains that are particularly relevant for older adults, such as autonomy, cognition, and social care. The EQ Health and Wellbeing (EQ-HWB) instrument, comprising 25 items, was developed to address this conceptual gap by integrating health and wellbeing domains. A shorter version, the EQ-HWB-9, has been proposed to facilitate use in research and clinical settings. However, the psychometric properties of the proxy-interviewer administered version of the EQ-HWB-9 have not yet been evaluated in the Brazilian population. Objective: To assess the psychometric properties of the EQ-HWB-9 among frail and non-frail older adults in Brazil. Methods: This will be a longitudinal psychometric study including test-retest and 3-month follow-up assessment. Data collection will be conducted at the Hospital do Servidor Público Municipal of São Paulo, including 140 caregivers (aged over ≥18 years) of frail (n=70) and non-frail (n=70) older adults (aged ≥60 years). The Brazilian Portuguese proxy interviewer-administered versions of the EQ-HWB-9, EQ-HWB Visual Analogue Scale (EQ-HWB-VAS), and complementary instruments (EQ-5D-3L, EQ-5D-5L, Short Warwick-Edinburgh mental well-being scale [SWEMWBS], Clinical Frailty Scale [CFS], Life-Space Assessment [LSA], Targeted Geriatric Assessment [TAGA], and Perceived of Change Scale [PCS]) will be administered. The psychometric properties will focus on reliability, measurement error, construct validity (convergent and discriminant), responsiveness, feasibility, and ceiling and floor effects. Discussion: This study will generate evidence on the validity of the EQ-HWB-9 and EQ-HWB-VAS in terms of reliability, measurement error, and construct validity and responsiveness, in a population of frail and non-frail older adults. This will generate important information on the feasibility of administration of the proxy interviewer administered version in a Brazilian context supporting its use in both clinical practice and health research.Keywords: Health-related quality of life; Older Adults; Frailty; Psychometric properties
