Introduction: The Ghanaian Ministry of Health and other stakeholders of health have initiated the process of requiring Health Technology Assessment (HTA) as a formal process for priority setting in Ghana. Progress made include an HTA pilot study, establishment of an HTA working group and development of a reference case to guide the conduct of economic evaluation as part of the HTA guidelines, which recommends the conduct of cost-utility analysis for health technologies using outcomes that include quality-adjusted life years (QALYs). There is no national value set available for the Ghanaian population to be used in estimating QALYs. The institutionalization and rise of HTA in the country necessitate that a value set be developed to allow estimation of QALYs to support HTA. This study therefore aimed to develop a value set for Ghana by eliciting Ghanaian general preferences using the EQ-5D-5L instrument. Methods: The study collected face-to-face preference data from 300 adult participants across three regions of Ghana using the adapted version of the EuroQol valuation technology (EQ-VT) standardised valuation protocol developed specifically for EQ-5D-5L valuation studies using composite time trade-off (cTTO) and discrete-choice experiments (DCEs). Additional qualitative data was collected to explore the ‘worse than death’ hypothesis to understand the contextual ‘value of life’ in Ghana and factors influencing respondents’ decision to opt to die rather than live in a particular health state. Different preference models were generated using both the cTTO and DCE data, either individually or together to provide complementary results on respondents’ utility preferences. Models explored were generalised least squares, Tobit, heteroskedastic, logit and hybrid. The best fitting model was selected for the value set based on its ability to account for the left censored and heteroscedasticity that was a feature of the data collected, logical consistency and on the statistical significance of the parameters. Inductive thematic analysis was used to analyse the qualitative data. Results: The 300 interviews provided 4500 cTTO responses and 4200 DCE responses. The demographic characteristics of respondents were representative of the Ghanaian population for religious background, level of education and marital status. It was not representative of the distribution of gender in Ghana. The preferred model chosen for the Ghana value set was Hybrid Tobit, random effect heteroscedastic, constrained model. The predicted value for the worst attainable health on the EQ-5D-5L (i.e. health state 55555) was -0.493 and that of the best health state (11112; except full health) was 0.969. The largest decrement was registered for level 5 mobility (0.369) followed by pain/discomfort (0.312), self-care (0.273), anxiety/depression (0.271) and usual activities (0.268). Findings from the qualitative study showed that health states perceived as ‘worse than death’ were those associated with impairment in mobility and anxiety/depression and pain/discomfort. Respondents preferred death under these circumstances because they wanted to avoid the financial burden on themselves and family, time spent in care giving by family, loss of personhood and loss of social status. Health and wellbeing were perceived as absence of illness and access to food. Conclusion: This is the first Ghanaian EQ-5D-5L value set based on social preference derived for a nationally representative sample in Ghana. The value set will play a key role in the institutionalization of HTA in Ghana and the use of economic evaluation studies to inform priority setting where different health technologies can be compared. The HTA working group has welcomed the findings of this study and have suggested dissemination to the broader stakeholders of health through a seminar or workshop.
