Objectives: Health technology assessment (HTA) agencies routinely utilize health-related quality of life (HRQoL) data to inform healthcare decision-making. While many have published methods guides, little is known about their preferences for HRQoL evidence, and their perspectives on the quality of the HRQoL data in HTA practice. The overall aim of this study is to understand the practices, views, and needs of HTA practitioners around the world regarding measurement, valuation, and use of HRQoL data. Methods: We identified a total of 60 countries where national HTA agencies, bodies, or committees existed, and/or HTA was used to inform healthcare decision-making. Utilizing the EuroQol Group membership, we invited HTA practitioners in those countries to complete an online survey inquiring their experiences and views on: i) utility instruments; ii) utility elicitation methods, iii) health preference sources, iv) data quality and appropriateness, and v) perceived research priorities. For questions using a Likert-type response scale, we used the mode (or median if no or multiple modes) of all responses for that country, and reported the median based on all country responses. We performed descriptive analyses of the overall sample, and then we examined the response differences across six regions (Commonwealth - AU/CA/NZ/UK, Western Europe, Central/Eastern Europe, Asia, Latin America, and Middle East/Africa). We pooled responses to open-ended questions for content analysis. Results: In total, 238 individuals from 45 countries completed the survey. The mean number of responses per country was 5.28 (SD: 4.45), with Vietnam, England, and South Korea being the top three. Overall, most responses came from government employees (72%) and 90% were involved in QALY-related work. The top three most frequently used utility instruments were EQ-5D (“very often”), SF-6D, (“occasionally”) and EQ-5D-Y (“occasionally”). The top three most frequently used utility elicitation methods were TTO, VAS, and SG, all of which were “often” used. Health-state preferences of the general public of another country (“often”) was more frequently used than the preferences of the local public (“occasionally”). The data quality issues that “often” arose across regions were the poor sample representativeness and small sample size of utility data (UD), poor matching of available health state UD with those of the CEA models, and the use of UD from multiple methods/instruments in a same model. In Asia and Western Europe, the top voted research priority was to develop utility instruments to capture the health care and social care impact; in the Middle East/Africa and Central/Eastern Europe, it was to make more recent UD available; in the Commonwealth countries, the priority was to develop utility instruments to capture the impact of treatment on carers and caregivers; in Latin America, the primary interest was to develop utility instruments to address inequality in care. In four regions, utility instruments for children was the second highest research priority. Conclusion: The survey filled important knowledge gaps with regard to the current practices of measurement and valuation of HRQoL in HTA and HTA practitioners’ views on instruments, methods, and data related issues and needs for generating HRQoL evidence.
