Objective: Recent evidence has established the feasibility of generating time trade-off (TTO) utility values using online videoconference (video) interviews, but has not assessed whether the results are equivalent to values elicited via face-to-face in-person interviews, that were widely used prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. This study examines the equivalence, feasibility and acceptability of video and in-person interviews in generating TTO values. The study further aims to inform the choice of mode of administration for the new UK EQ-5D-5L valuation of the EQ-5D-5L and future valuation studies. Methods: Sample participants in Sheffield and Oxford, England were recruited using a blended approach of different methods to attract different people to be interviewed, and were sampled based on age, gender, ethnicity, and index of multiple deprivation. Participants were allocated to be interviewed either via video or in-person by 6 trained interviewers. Participants completed TTO tasks for the same block of 10 EQ-5D-5L health states using the EQ-VTv2 software. Feasibility, acceptability and equivalence was assessed across mode using: sample representativeness; participant understanding, engagement and feedback; participant preferred mode of interview; data quality; mean utility and distribution of values for each health state; and regression analyses assessing the impact of mode whilst controlling for the sociodemographic characteristics of participants. Results: The video and in-person samples had statistically significant differences in terms of ethnicity and income levels but were broadly similar across all other characteristics. Video interviews generated marginally lower quality data across some criteria. Participant understanding and feedback was positive and similar across modes. TTO values were similar across modes (mean and distribution for each state); whilst mean TTO values were lower for the in-person interviews for the most severe states, most noticeably the worst state, in most regression analyses the mode dummy was insignificant. There was no clear preference of mode across all individuals, though the characteristics of participants preferring to be interviewed across each mode differs. Discussion: The results demonstrate that video and in-person TTO interviews are feasible and acceptable. Both generated good-quality data, though video interviews had lower quality data across some criteria. Whilst TTO values differed across the modes for the more severe states, mode does not appear to be the cause. The sample is highly educated across both modes, and it is possible that data quality and TTO values by mode could differ in a less educated sample. The study results suggest that whilst TTO data collection using either mode is feasible, acceptable and will not in itself affect TTO values, the characteristics of people willing to be interviewed differs for each mode, and this in turn may impact on sample representativeness for some characteristics and the TTO values.
