Background: The Y-5L is currently classified as “experimental” according to the EuroQol IP Status Policy. The EuroQol Executive Committee identified an important research gap, i.e., lack of a mapping function between the Y-3L and the Y-5L, while considering the request to approve “Beta” status of the Y-5L instrument. A mapping function in together with the Y-3L values sets, which became available in an increasing number of countries since 2021, can be applied to the Y-5L data to generate health utilities. It is also expected that the mapping function will available when the Y-5L instrument achieves its approved status. Aim: The primary aim of this study is to exam different mapping approaches between the Y-3L and the Y-5L, and to recommend a mapping function which can be used internationally for deriving health utilities from the Y-5L data.  Data: We will use primary and secondary data for this study. The data should be collected in parallel use of the Y-3L and Y-5L instruments. The final dataset is expected to cover, with reasonable sample size, the full scale of the cross-tabulation between the Y-3L and Y-5L data. EuroQoL office has identified 27 projects that involved parallel data collection use both instruments. So far, the Principals Investigators from 21 projects agreed to make their project data available for our study. Data sharing is ongoing. Based on our knowledge with those studies, as well as our preliminary descriptive analysis on datasets that we have access to, we expect to see a good concentration of the secondary data on good/mild health states. This might generate problems for our analysis, for example, generating unstable estimates. To fill in the potential data “gaps”, the Younger Populations Working Group (YPWG) included primary data collection from children who are unwell or very unwell as the Working Group’s key research area under the EuroQol 15th Joint Call for proposal (released in February 2023). The primary data collection is not part of this proposed study, although our study will be a key user of the data.  Methods: Our primary choices of statistical methods include the multinomial logit regression, ordinal logistic regression and a non-parametric method. We will take full use of the repeated responses in our analysis, for example, by applying for a respondent random effect while analysing each dimension of the Y-3L. We will also consider allowing for correlations between five models (one for each dimension of the Y-3L) by respondents. A few special features of the Y-3L and 5-L data will be explored including but not limited to the impacts of instrument versions (i.e. proxy v.s. self-reported) and wording in the descriptive systems (e.g. wording is identical between level 4 in Y-5L and level 3 in Y-3L). We will split our final dataset to estimation and validation samples. The primary criterion for model selection will base on the prediction accuracy use our validation sample, while other criteria will also be considered (e.g. prediction accuracy for children with different severity levels, at different age groups).
