Introduction Health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is a multi-dimensional definition that can be used to assess the impact of healthcare interventions. Although recent research has proposed that HRQoL may be culturally specific in China, limited studies to date have examined how the description and measurement of HRQoL in China differs from other cultural contexts. This study aims to explore how HRQoL is defined in the context of Chinese culture by systematically reviewing published studies on the Chinese understanding of HRQoL. Method We conducted a systematic literature search in three Chinese databases and four English databases, including studies that: a) developed HRQoL measures in a Chinese cultural context; b) discussed the definition of HRQoL in a Chinese cultural context or constructed a conceptual framework of HRQoL specifically for Chinese culture; c) conducted qualitative interviews exploring how Chinese people conceptualize HRQoL. Results Two conceptual frameworks of HRQoL were identified in China. From the perspective of Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), the descriptions of HRQoL were based on the theory of Yin and Yang, where health is the result of the balance between the Yin and Yang of the world and people themselves. Based on the theory of Yin and Yang, the most common concepts that were used in describing HRQoL were: 1) ‘xingshentongyi’, which represents the unity of the body (e.g. ‘complexion’) and spirit (e.g. ‘energy’); 2) ‘tianrenheyi’, which refers to the harmony between man and nature (e.g. ‘climate adjustment’); 3) ‘qiqing’, which describes the seven forms of emotions (e.g. ‘joy’ and ‘fear’). Apart from the perspective of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chinese literature on HRQoL is typically related to the WHO definition of health, which is composed of physical, mental, and social aspects. These descriptions of HRQoL had significant overlap with the descriptive system of EQ-5D, although some health concepts, including adaptability to natural environments, emotional experiences, and cognitive function, were also added. Conclusion The concept of HRQoL in China is not unified, but rather twofold. In addition to a framework based on TCM, there is also a framework that was built based on the WHO definition of health. This can shed light on the complex nature of HRQoL in China and can inform future health measurement studies in China.
