Background: The EQ-5D is the most widely used health-related quality of life questionnaire in cost-utility analysis internationally, and a version of it, the EQ-5D-Y, has been developed for use with young people. Recent work from members of the EuroQol Group has demonstrated that using existing adult EQ-5D-3L value sets for EQ-5D-Y states is inappropriate. New valuation exercises are needed for the EQ-5D-Y but these face a number of challenges not present in the adult counterparts. For example, if adults complete these new exercises, then what perspective should they use in evaluating the states: their own health or the health of a child? If children/adolescents’ preferencesare sought, what elicitation task should be used to obtain them? There is no clear guidance about these issues in the literature, but research conducted to date provide some directions. Such guidance suggests that if adults are asked to value EQ-5D-Y states, they should consider the health of a child and if children/adolescents are included in the task, then a choice-based method such as discrete choice experiment (DCE) might be preferable to approaches such as time trade-off or standard gamble. The aim of this study was to obtain latent scale discrete choice utilities from adults in the general population to develop a future EQ-5D-Y value set in the United Kingdom. Methods: Preferences were obtained using a DCE from a representative sample in terms of age, gender, social grade and nation, of adult members of the UK general population belonging to an online panel. Adults completed the valuation survey from the perspective of a 10-year-old child. A blocked Bayesian efficient design was used to identify pairs of health states, with fifteen pairs presented to each respondent. DCE data were modelled using a main effects multinomial logit and mixed logit models. Model performance was evaluated using goodness-of-it assessed with Akaike information and Bayesian information criteria, and probability prediction accuracy. Results: 1,000 participants completed the survey and overall the distribution of demographics was similar to the UK general population. The modelling exercise suggested consistent latent utilities forboth multinomial logit and mixed logit models. Mixed logit yielded better goodness-of-fit as indicatedby the smaller AIC and BIC and more accurate probability predictions compared to the MNL. Conclusion: Our paper has produced a latent scale EQ-5D-Y value set. The next step will be to combine this latent scale utility function with the most appropriate method to anchor it on the quality-adjusted life years (QALY) scale to obtain a potential EQ-5D-Y value set in the UK. A separate study is underway to test alternative approaches to anchoring.
