This paper offers a new explanation of the disparity between utilities elicited using standard (or Classic) and Time Trade-Off (TTO) and utilities elicited using Chaining. we refer to “Classic” as the utility of a health state obtained from a Time Trade-off question where the end points are Full Health and Death. We refer to “Chained” as the utilities that are obtained from a TTO question where at least one of the end points is neither Full Health or Death. Previous literature has observed that the two sets of utilities are different, and they have been explained by anchoring effects. We present and alternative explanation based on the different Evaluation Mode that Classic and Chained TTO use, namely, Separate Evaluation Mode in the case of TTO and Join Evaluation Mode in the case of Chained TTO. In this paper, we present the result of a study conducted among the Spanish general population (n=346) to separate the role of anchoring from the role in the Evaluation Mode as potential explanations of the disparity between Classic and Chained utilities. All subjects had to estimate the utility of three health states (say A, B and C) using the standard TTO. They also had to answer three direct TTO questions (A vs B, A vs C and B vs C) to estimate Chained utilities. The Chained procedure always started with a comparison between two health states with the same duration (10 years). Our study also observed differences between Classic and Chained utilities. The disparity was explained by the large amount of preference reversals observed. People preferred one health state in standard TTO and another one in the choice between (A, 10 years) vs (B, 10 years). The discrepancy between Classic and Chained utilities vanished for those subjects who did not do preference reversals. Those results suggest that the difference between Classic and Chained utilities is mainly produced by the different Evaluation Mode and not so much because of anchoring effects. We present the implications of our results for preference elicitation methods for health states.
