Background Cancer treatments impact health-related quality of life (HRQoL). HRQoL is typically measured using questionnaires such as the EQ-5D-3L which generate health utilities that can measure patient preferences at three broad levels in cancer care: 1) micro (e.g., clinical decision making), 2) meso (e.g., economic analyses), 3) macro (e.g., population health). Routine system-wide collection of HRQoL could facilitate clinical decision making between patients and clinicians, and facilitate real-world economic evaluations of publicly funded cancer therapies supporting health system sustainability. Objectives Based out of Ontario, Canada, the objectives of this study were 1) to directly and prospectively measure real-world EQ-5D-3L health utilities of patients receiving publicly reimbursed systemic therapy at a pilot site; 2) To evaluate the implementation of collecting EQ-5D-3L at a pilot site; 3) to examine how inequities predict EQ-5D-3L Health utilities in an unselected sample of patients with cancer. Methods Patients newly starting a publicly reimbursed systemic therapy at the Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre were approached to participate in the study. Patients were administered the EQ-5D-3L and VAS instruments, as well as optional demographic questions. Patients were targeted for follow-up on approximate 4 week intervals to a maximum of 4 follow-ups. A series of semi-structured interviews were conducted with a subset of participants. We used multivariate linear regression to examine the association between demographic and SES factors and EQ-5D-3L health utilities. Results A total of 170 patients were enrolled to the study between May 2024 and February 2025, with 94% of participants indicating they would definitely or very likely complete the EQ-5D questionnaire at subsequent appointments. Interview participants expressed satisfaction with the EQ-5D questionnaire, and are overall supportive towards regular collection of EQ-5D health utilities. Analyses indicate baseline health utilities from our cohort are similar to other published studies in cancer. Lower income was associated with lower health utilities; younger age (< 50 years) in females but not in males, was associated with lower health utilities, after adjusting for cancer site.  Implications The success of this work paves a path towards widespread collection of EQ-5D responses using existing patient reported outcome infrastructure already in place across Ontario. Next, health technology assessments need to consider the impact of patient income and birth sex on EQ-5D-3L responses. Future research is encouraged to investigate additional equity factors that impact EQ-5D health utilities in patients with cancer.
