Introduction: When developing the EQ-HWB, the face validation stage and psychometric stage were done in six countries including China. We noticed two problems when analyzing the China psychometric data: 1) over 70% of the 500 respondents had university or higher education level and the mean age of the sample was 35.9 years old, which suggests the sample was dominated by young and well-educated population; 2) the UK model achieved good fit with some modifications with all countries except for China, where many of the feelings sub-domains needed to be combined. It is not clear whether this CFA results was affected by the online sample of the E-QALY study. In this project, we aimed to redo the psychometric analysis using a F2F sample. Method: The existing questionnaire from the E-QALY was used in order to be consistent with previous study. A sample of 500 was used with 100 patients with lung cancer, 100 patients with diabetes, 100 patients with depression, 100 patients with schizophrenia and 100 general public were invited to participate the survey. Patients were mainly recruited in local hospitals and general public were recruited through personal invitations. All participants were recruited in Guizhou Province China. 14 undergraduate students were recruited as interviewers from Guizhou Medical University, China. All questionnaires were printed out before the interview. Participants were encouraged to respond to the questionnaire by themselves. Data were double entry by the interviewers using Epidata. For the 62 candidate items, the EFA (with EQ-5D-5L), CFA (bifactor model as reported in the E-QALY project), data distribution, known-group validity and item response theory results were reported. Additionally, we elicited 27 candidate items related to the EQ-HWB from the 62-item pool to explore the factor structure by EFA. Given that items about vision, hearing, sleep, and discomfort were identified as separate domains, they were excluded. Next, the CFA bi-factor model was constructed to confirm the domains of the EQ-HWB. Item performances were assessed by the IRT. Results: The data collection was conducted between December 2021 and September 2022 in Guizhou Province, China. The final sample size was 538, with n=98 patients with lung cancer, n=125 patients with diabetes, n=102 patients with depression, n=114 patients with schizophrenia, and n=101 general public. The mean age of our sample was 47.62 years old (SD: 17.19); 55.39% were male and only 16.17% had a university or higher education level. Seven items possessed a skewed distribution in the response option level 1, and five items had a lower than 5% response distribution in the response option level 5. The EFA results illustrate the six-factor structure explaining the structure of 62 items, in which items with positive phrasing were loaded with one separate factor. It prompted that a Bi-factor model would be appropriate in the CFA approach. The replicated UK bifactor model, reported in the E-QALY project, was optimized, with the model goodness-of-fit indexes of CFI 0.943, TLI 0.939, and RMSEA 0.052 (0.050,0.054). In lung cancer and diabetic subgroups, items about physical sensation (like pain frequency) were able to identify disease burden from healthy populations. Almost all items were sensitive to the burden of depression disease, but items did not present strong discriminability between schizophrenia patients and healthy people. For the 27 candidate items, a three-factor structure, which were psychological well-being, physical function, and physical sensation, was illustrated by the EFA. The model goodness-of-fit index of the three-bifactor model was CFI 0.964, TLI 0.955, and RMSEA 0.081 (0.074, 0.088). The item performances revealed that items ‘How difficult is it for you to wash, toilet, dress yourself, eat or care for your appearance?’, ‘I felt unable to cope with my day to day life’, and ‘I felt unsupported by people’ had less ability to be identified by respondents with different latent traits. Discussion: The optimized CFA model result confirms that the intended UK model structure can fit in China background. The candidate items of the EQ-HWB can measure health and well-being in patients with physical or mental diseases. The EQ-HWB has the potential to be used for measuring health and well-being in China.
