Introduction One issue currently preventing the wider adoption of discrete choice experiments (DCEs) involves the differences in scale found between these studies and those using a time trade-off (TTO) valuation technique. Specifically, values for severe health problems are often much lower using a DCE approach. However, research has also shown that DCE models specifying non-linear time preferences produce utility estimates on a similar scale to the TTO. While multiple discount factors have been proposed, no study has directly compared different discount methods using EQ-5D data. Methods We compare three different discount factors (exponential, hyperbolic, power) to constant proportionality using two recently completed DCE studies from the US (N=2,260) and Australian (N=944) general population. Each of the four specifications is judged by face validity (utility values, number of disordered levels), model fit (AIC, BIC), and predictive validity (Χ2 and Lin’s 𝜌, using an 80/20 split). All tests are performed using both the conditional logit and Zermelo-Bradley-Terry (ZBT) models to examine the consistency across valuation methods. Results Across both studies and regression models, we find that specifications incorporating non-linear time preferences have higher utility values for severe health problems than those using constant proportionality. Models specifying non-linear time preferences also had better fit (lower AIC and BIC) and greater predictive validity (higher Χ2 and Lin’s 𝜌). The hyperbolic and power discount functions produce nearly identical results (<0.001 difference in utility values for both models in the Australian study). Discussion We find additional evidence that DCE studies should account for non-linear time preferences in the valuation model. However, we do not find evidence of a dominant discount function. The exponential discount function produced fewer disordered levels than the hyperbolic or power functions, but it had poorer model fit and predictive validity across three of the four study/model combinations.
