In total, we interviewed 30 respondents, the detailed demographic information was provided below in Table 1. We used convenient sampling method and did not set quota for the sample in terms of the gender, age, education and ethnicity. In overall, the sample was young and with high level of education. There were 5 respondents from interviewer 1 that did not fill in the self-reported questionnaire, which caused some missing information. The only variable we set quota on the sample was the category of the respondents (carers, physical patients, mental patients). Please note that in the self-completed questionnaire, we used ‘whether you have long-standing conditions’ to find out whether the respondent have physical or mental problems, but some respondents did not think their problems are ‘long-standing’ and therefore did not indicate their condition in the questionnaire. In this case, the interviewers probed that condition that the respondent was having and put down in the interview transcript. We recruited 2 postgraduate students and 1 recently graduated master student as interviewers from School of Public Health, Fudan University, Shanghai. The two interviewers had qualitative interview experience and all three interviewers were trained and briefed by the investigators before formal data collection. Interviews were conducted between 26th July and 17th August 2018. All respondents were recruited from two hospitals in Shanghai, No.10 Hospital of Shanghai and Zhongshan Hospital of Fudan University. Most respondents were recruited from the outpatient services, some were recruited from inpatient services. Interviewers approached the respondents and explained the purpose of this study and the takes they will be expected to do. Once the respondents consented, the interviewers took the respondents to a quiet place (e.g. meeting room, doctor’s office) and conducted the interview. All interviews were conducted following the International interview protocol of the E-QALY study. We did adjust the question of asking education attainment in the self-completed questionnaire according to the Chinese education system.
