BackgroundThe EuroQol group seeks to provide population reference estimates (or “population norms”) for its suite of measures. While random sampling of the population of interest is a gold standard, it is debatable whether internet panel based quota sampling can achieve representativeness in its estimates, which may be achievable if distribution of key covariates approximates the population of interest. The EuroQol is currently (and may continue to) collect population level data using online panels but there are concerns about this approach (e.g. voiced by members at the 42nd Plenary). If the data collected through online panels are perceived as unrepresentative, this puts at risk a large body of EuroQol-funded research. Therefore, we proposed a secondary data analysis project, exploiting already collected data using different sampling approaches available for the UK/England, to evaluate the representativeness of online panel sampling. The aims of the project are:Using traditional regression and unsupervised community identification approaches to understand heterogeneity in health and sociodemographic distributions across datasetsApply adjustment techniques to derive EQ-5D-5L norms based on aim 1 results and assess any remaining differences in adjusted norms across included datasetsMethodsTarget datasets are:Health Survey of England (stratified random sampling)EuroQol Data for Assessment of Population Health Needs and Instrument Evaluation (EQ-DAPHNIE: online panel with quota sampling)POPulation health impact of the CORoNavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic (POPCORN: online panel with quota sampling), andthe EQ-5D-5L UK valuation dataset (non-random quota sampling).Analyses approaches include traditional multivariable regression analyses using EQ-5D-5L profile responses, utility values and EQ VAS as dependent variables. Remaining variations in EQ-5D-5L across datasets, after adjusting for sociodemographic, SES and health data will be assessed. In parallel, unsupervised machine learning community identification will be used to uncover heterogeneity within each dataset with the goal of identifying whether certain health and SES subgroups are systematically underrepresented/overrepresented in each dataset (as compared to one another). Community detection algorithms will be used to ensure that identified patterns reflect meaningful population structure rather than sampling noise. After understanding the most relevant variables related to variations in EQ-5D-5L across datasets, we will test adjustment procedures for population EQ-5D-5L estimates including post-stratification weighting (both using joint distributions and ranking procedures), mixed-effects modeling, and weighted continuous norming. Relevance for the EuroQol groupThis project directly aligns with aim 2 of the call for research of the PHS Working Group: examine methodological approaches for estimating population health norms, particularity the inference of recruitment methods, survey administration modes, sample representativeness (20th Joint Call of EuroQol Working Groups, September 2025). This study will generate evidence of how two online panel (quota sampling) recruited samples and non-random quota sampling data compare to data generated from random sampling.
