Background: The EQ-5D-5L is one of the most widely used generic instruments to assess health-related quality of life (HRQoL), but it has known limitations in capturing cognitive and psychosocial functioning: domains especially relevant for individuals with schizophrenia. To address these limitations, the EuroQol Group has developed EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox v1.0, including a newly developed cognition bolt-on set for the EQ-5D-5L. This includes both a global cognition item and a set of subdimension items (e.g., memory, concentration, reasoning, confusion, and language). While cognition has been the most extensively studied bolt-on across other populations, it has never been tested in patients with schizophrenia—a population in which cognitive impairments are central and long-lasting. Additionally, the EQ Health and Wellbeing Short (EQ-HWB-S), which includes several mental health–relevant domains (e.g., cognition), offers another potential tool for capturing the aspects of HRQoL. This study seeks to assess and compare the content validity of the cognition-related items from the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox and EQ-HWB-S in patients with schizophrenia and both the caregivers, as well as healthcare professionals in Indonesia. Objectives: This study aims to qualitatively assess the content validity, including relevance, comprehensibility, and comprehensiveness of the EQ-5D-5L cognition bolt-on (global and sub-dimension formats) and the EQ-HWB-S among Indonesian patients with schizophrenia. It also seeks to explore the acceptability of the translated bolt-ons wordings and to gather feedback from patients, caregivers, and healthcare professionals to inform further refinement and cultural adaptation. Methods: This is a single-country, multi-perspective qualitative study conducted in Indonesia. Following the EuroQol Translation Protocol, the EQ-5D-5L cognition bolt-on items will be translated into Bahasa Indonesia, including cognitive debriefing interviews with 8 general population participants. Subsequently, semi-structured qualitative interviews using cognitive debriefing techniques will be conducted with three stakeholder groups: 15 adult patients with schizophrenia, 15 caregivers, and 10 healthcare professionals (psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, or nurses). Participants will complete and discuss the EQ-5D-5L, the EQ-5D-5L with cognition bolt-ons (randomized order), and the EQ-HWB-S cognition item. Interviews will explore how participants interpret, relate to, and differentiate the items. All interviews will be audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim, and analyzed using Braun and Clarke’s thematic analysis framework, supported by ATLAS.ti. The study will adhere to COREQ reporting standards.
