Introduction: Since the launch of the EQ-5D-Youth (EQ-5D-Y) in 2010, the instrument has been included in an increasing number of studiesthat consider health states for children and adolescents,with an accompanying demand for value sets. Given the similarities between the EQ-5D-Y and the EQ-5D-3L and that more than 20 value sets are currently available for the EQ-5D-3L, a natural starting point is to evaluate whether state valuations differ whenparticipants complete valuation tasks with different combinations of instruments and perspectivesadopted. Methods: The studywasconducted in Germany, Netherlands, Spain, and the UK. The valuation interview startedwith background questions, followed bya rankingtask, composite TTO (cTTO)tasks (9 states) and discrete choice experiments with dead (DCE+dead)tasks (9 pairs of health states). Debriefing questions were used to elicit respondents’opinions on the tasks and the perspectives they were asked to take. Seventeenhealth states were includedand divided in two blocks.Half of the respondentsreceivedthehealth states from theEQ-5D-Ydescriptive system, the other half valued health states based on the EQ-5D-3L. These two arms were further randomised into two groups that were asked to value health states either as if they were experienced by“themselves” (adult perspective) or by“a 10 year old child” (child perspective),obtaining four study groups.Descriptive analysis was used to examinesample background characteristics andcTTO and DCEresponses. 2-way MANOVAanalysis was used to compare cTTO responses and post-hoc comparisons wereadjusted using Bonferronicorrection. OLS regression was performed using N3 model. All results werepresented by the four arms of the study design. Results:The total sample consisted of 805 members of the adult general population, spread equally across the participating countries. Background characteristicswere broadly similaramong the four study arms. 2-way MANOVA analysis found a significant effect in the interaction between the instrument and theperspective for the observed cTTO values. Post-hoc comparisons after Bonferronicorrection confirmed that the wording affect values only on the EQ-5D-3L version, the wording affect values only for adults perspective and when crossing EQ-5D-3L for adults and EQ-5D-Y for child, the values are also affected. Estimated utilities for the pits state(33333)were different with the lowest estimated in the EQ-5D-3L and adult perspective (-0.309), followed by the EQ-5D-3L and child perspective (-0.227), then by EQ-5D-Y and adult perspective (-0.171) and finally for the EQ-5D-Y and child perspective (-0.151).Conclusion:Preliminary results from this study identified an interaction between the wording of the descriptive system valued (EQ-5D-3L versus EQ-5D-Y) and perspective (adult versus child) influencing values given to health states. Such outcome suggests that perspective and wording cannot be considered in isolation. The extent of the impact of this interaction on the values still needs to bedetermined in further analyses.
