Background: International health surveys such as EQ-DAPHNIE (The EuroQol Data Assessment of Population Health Needs and Instrument Evaluation) support cross-country comparisons of population health. For such comparisons to be valid, participants across countries should interpret health status measures consistently. However, the validity of such cross-country comparisons may be threatened by heterogeneity in how patients with the same underlying health status interpret and respond to questions about their health and quality of life, a phenomenon also known as differential item functioning (DIF). The presence of differential item functioning (DIF): individuals with the same underlying health respond differently by country, will compromise the comparability. The EQ-DAPHNIE dataset provides a unique opportunity to evaluate the differential item functioning across multiple health status measures and across countries and languages. Our pilot work using this dataset identified moderate to large country-related DIF in several EQ-5D-5L dimensions, primarily mobility, self-care, and usual activities, and particularly across non-English-speaking countries. However, these analyses focused solely on the EQ-5D-5L, and they did not address population composition differences across countries with respect to confounding factors such as age and sex.Aims: This project seeks to build on our pilot work by:Assessing the presence and magnitude of country-related DIF in EQ-5D-5L, EQ-HWB-9 and PROMIS-10 across multiple countries using the EQ-DAPHNIE dataset;Comparing the magnitude of country-related DIF with other sources of DIF (e.g., age, sex) to contextualize the relative impact of country-level differences; andSide-by-side evaluating country-related DIF across EQ-5D-5L, EQ-HWB-9, and PROMIS-10, providing insights on which instrument has more cross-country measurement invarianceMethods: This study will use advanced psychometric methods on the EQ-DAPHNIE dataset to evaluate DIF in EQ-HWB-9, PROMIS-10, and EQ-5D-5L items. Specifically, ordinal logistic regression analysis framework, and modern item response theory (IRT) modelling framework will be used to evaluate DIF on these measures. We will first estimate DIF for EQ-HWB-9 and PROMIS-10, and then compare their DIF patterns with EQ-5D-5L to identify which instrument shows the most measurement invariance. To contextualize country-related DIF, additional analyses will compare its magnitude with DIF associated with factors such as age and sex. Analyses will be conducted both on the original dataset and on matched subsamples (e.g., generated using propensity-score matching) to improve comparability and reduce confounding from sociodemographic and health-utilization factors. Benefit of the research: This project directly addresses Populations and Health Systems Working Group Priority #3 by systematically investigating response-scale heterogeneity across multiple EQ instruments. It will provide a reproducible framework for analyzing DIF to support capacity building, ultimately strengthening the use of EuroQol instruments in population health assessment.
