From the abstract of the published paper Measuring inequality in quality of life: Why the EQ-5D may underestimate it. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11136-025-04087-7 :The EQ-5D is increasingly being used in studies of health inequalities, providing further evidence of a social gradient in health; i.e. consistent positive associations between a socioeconomic indicator and health. However, the steepness in the social gradients in HRQoL differs depending on which of the two EQ-5D measures is used; whether based on respondents’ EQ-5D-5L descriptions or by their direct valuation in EQ VAS. This study aims to provide new knowledge as to why the two HRQoL measures suggest different degrees of health inequalities. Based on two large unique data sets (Tromsø Study Wave 7, N= 21,083; MIC study, N= 8,022), cross-sectional analyses were conducted. We identified the most prevalent EQ-5D-5L profiles. Within each of ten EQ-5D-5L profile groups, we examine response heterogeneities in EQ VAS scores using linear regressions, as explained by respondents’ level of educational attainment, controlling for age and sex.We showed significantly increasing EQ VAS scores along with educational attainments. For instance, in the most prevalent health state (11121), a consistent education-health gradient was observed: compared to individuals with primary education, the EQ-VAS was 1.7 higher among those with secondary education; 2.6 higher among individuals with short tertiary education; and, 3.7 higher among individuals with long tertiary education. This paper provides new insights into the use of EQ-5D in health inequality studies by suggesting an additional underlying education gradient in HRQoL than what is revealed through the EQ-5D-5L values. Broader psychosocial domains and aspects of adaptation should be considered when monitoring health inequalities.From an additional follow-up study, based on the EQ-DAPHNIE data: Measuring inequality in quality of life: Further evidence that the EQ-5D-5L may underestimate itAfter completing the planned work, we wanted to investigate the generalizability of our results – based on another large dataset. Two research questions were addressed: i) is there supportive evidence in other datasets for a hidden education–health gradient among respondents with identical EQ-5D-5L profiles?, ii) does a similar pattern emerge if, instead of educational attainment, we use a different socioeconomic proxy, such as income status? For reason of comparability with datasets used in our first paper, we chose eight rich countries: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, the Netherlands, New Zealand, UK, and US, and an age range of [25-79] years (N = 33,281). Educational attainment was reported using country-specific categories and harmonized into three levels for cross-country comparability. As an alternative socioeconomic proxy, we use income status, capturing financial strains that are particularly relevant in cross-country analyses where absolute income levels and purchasing power differ substantially. Income status was measured by a subjective indicator, ‘how you feel about your household’s income nowadays’, reported along four levels: comfortable, coping, difficult, and very difficult. Due to relatively few responses in the bottom category, the last two were combined and reverse-coded. Regression results show a clear educational gradient in EQ VAS within identical EQ-5D-5L profiles, consistent with our first study. Within the 11121 profile, EQ VAS scores were 1.1 and 2.4 points higher among respondents with medium and high education, respectively, than among those with low education. Tertiary education was associated with higher EQ VAS scores in nine of ten profiles, with seven statistically significant effects. Income status exhibited an even stronger gradient. In the same profile (11121), EQ VAS scores were 2.4 points higher among respondents coping with their income and 5.0 points higher among those living comfortably, compared to those reporting financial difficulties. Overall, significant income gradients were observed in nine of the ten profiles. This study provides strong cross-national supportive evidence of a “hidden” socioeconomic gradient in health-related quality of life (HRQoL) that is not fully captured by the EQ-5D-5L descriptive system. Among individuals reporting identical EQ-5D-5L profiles, both education and—more prominently—income status, were systematically associated with higher EQ VAS scores. These findings suggest that individuals with lower socioeconomic status experience worse overall health than reflected by the five EQ-5D-5L dimensions, highlighting limitations in the instrument’s ability to capture socioeconomic disparities in HRQoL. The results have significant implications for health measurement and policy evaluation. Reliance on EQ-5D-5L values alone may underestimate socioeconomic health inequalities, challenging its use in equity-oriented policy analyses and health inequality monitoring. More research is needed on which factors might help explain these heterogeneities; dimensions of HRQoL (‘bolt-ons’) beyond those included in the EQ-5D, and demographic characteristics.
