Introduction The EQ Health and Wellbeing (EQ-HWB) is a generic new instrument developed internationally to use in evaluating interventions across health, public health, and social care, and enabling the inclusion of impacts on caregivers. Evaluations of the instrument’s performance in a range of informal caregiver populations is now needed. The EQ-HWB has 25-items. A short form, the EQ-HWB-S has 9-items. Objectives In study 1, we aimed to investigate the validity and reliability of the EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S in parents of children with health conditions, specifically distinguishing differences in caregiver contribution, support, finance, work, and caregiver health. In study 2, we aimed to conduct a content analysis for the EQ-HWB to investigate its comprehensibility, relevance and comprehensiveness. The comprehensiveness of the EQ-HWB-S was investigated by exploring participants’ views on the inclusion of additional items from the EQ-HWB and items from the CarerQol-7D. Additionally, we aimed to assess the content validity of potential modifications of EQ-HWB items that are currently being considered by the EQ-HWB Working Group. Methods In Study 1, we explored EQ-HWB item response distributions across a sample of 225 participants who were parents of children with a range of health conditions. Convergent validity of the EQ-HWB was assessed against the EQ-5D and CarerQol-7D questionnaires using Spearman correlations. Known-groups validity analysis was conducted on caregiver outcomes using t-tests (Cohen’s d as the effect size), and one-way ANOVAs (with Eta-squared for effect size) for EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S sum-scores, and EQ-HWB-S, EQ-5D-5L, and CarerQol-7D index-scores. Test-retest reliability was conducted over 2-days using Intraclass Correlation Coefficients (ICC) for totals and Kappa for items, on the follow-up data (n=193). In study 2, we conducted qualitative analysis on a subsample of 21 participants who participated in semi-structured interviews. We used content and thematic analysis techniques to analyse the data. Results In study 1, we found that the physical EQ-HWB items (seeing, hearing, mobility, activities, personal-care, felt unsafe) were more negatively skewed than other EQ-HWB items. Known-group validity results conformed to a priori hypotheses; effect size comparisons between instruments varied. Convergent validity results confirmed to hypotheses between EQ-HWB and EQ-5D-5L, and somewhat conformed against the CarerQol-7D items. ICC results were excellent; Kappa results suggested moderate test-retest agreement, with variation across items. In study 2, we found that the 25 items had high relevance and were well understood by participants, although there were some difficulties with comprehension regarding the wording of the seeing and hearing items. The selection of the 9 items for the EQ-HWB-S was positively received by participants. We investigated a range of potential changes to the items which may help in finalising the EQ-HWB-S to Beta status. Conclusions The EQ-HWB instruments were found to be valid and reliable against our criteria, and distinguished between groups for caregiver contribution, support, finance/income, and caregiver health. The EQ-HWB instruments seem suitable for measuring quality-of-life of caregivers of children with health conditions. Qualitative analysis supported the COSMIN concepts of relevance, comprehensibility and comprehensiveness of the instrument in this sample of caregivers of children with health conditions.
