Introduction The first international protocol for valuing the EQ-5D-Y-3L recommends that valuation tasks are completed by adult general public respondents adopting the perspective of a 10-year-old child. This choice of perspective has been the subject of debate. Where values obtained under an own health perspective (the standard perspective used in valuing adult health states) have been found to differ from those obtained under a 10-year-old child perspective, it is unclear whether these differences are driven by the shift from thinking about adults to thinking about children, by the shift from thinking about oneself to thinking about another person, or both. It is also unclear whether the age of the child described or the valuation technique used matters. This study examines the impact on EQ-5D-Y-3L values of using different perspectives, child ages, and valuation techniques. The aim is to generate evidence that can be used to inform future methods and protocols for obtaining values for EQ-5D-Y-3L health states. Methods Two techniques (time trade-off; TTO and visual analogue scale; VAS) and four perspectives (own health, other adult’s health, 4-year-old child’s health, 10-year-old child’s health) were compared. Respondents each completed 24 valuation tasks, valuing 3 EQ-5D-Y-3L health states using both techniques and all four perspectives. They also completed debrief and priority setting questions designed to understand how they approached the valuation tasks and their wider views about how health care resources should be prioritised between adults and children, respectively. Data were collected via videoconference interviews with members of the public in England. Results 300 interviews were completed. In both the TTO and VAS tasks, and for all three health states examined, the difference in values/ratings observed between the 4-year-old child and 10-year-old child perspectives was negligible. For one of the severe health states, respondents gave substantially lower TTO values under their own health perspective than under the child health perspectives, with values under the other adult’s health perspective lying in between. These differences observed in the TTO data were not observed in the VAS data, where mean health state ratings were similar across all perspectives. Of the various statements presented to respondents describing factors they might have considered in completing the valuation tasks, the statement ‘I find it difficult to choose a shorter life for a child’ was the one that was most frequently selected. Conclusions Differences between the own health perspective and child health perspective TTO values appear to be in part due to differences in how people feel about health states for adults and health states for children, and in part due to differences in how people feel about health states for themselves and health states for other people. The fact that similar differences were not observed in the VAS data suggests that they may be an artefact of the TTO technique. Some of the study findings add to the existing evidence that adult TTO values tend to be lower than corresponding child TTO values because many people find trading life years for children more difficult. The age of the hypothetical child in the valuation tasks does not appear to substantially affect valuations.
