Introduction: In 2015, we introduced the concept of Personal Utility Functions (PUFs) at the Scientific Plenary meeting (Devlin et al 2015), and shared some promising early results from pre-piloting.In contrast to existing valuation methods –all of whichrely on presenting health states and inferring from respondents’responses what their preferences are with respect to the descriptive system, the PUF approach asks respondentsto consider the dimensions and levels of the EQ-5D, and takes them through a series of tasks to help them attach weights to reflect the importance of these relative to each other.We also ask respondentsto identify their anchor for dead = 0.An important emphasis of the approach is on helping respondentsreflect and deliberate on their answers as they construct their PUF. Subsequent to the Plenary, we further improved our methods for eliciting PUFs, and conducted pilot interviews with n=76 members of the general public in England and a convenience sample of n=30health outcomes professionals working for Pharmerit (various locations). The aimsof this paper areto (a) report the results from the pilot and (b) demonstrate the way in which the PUFs of individuals can be modelled to obtain a value set. Methods:The method allows for the estimation of each respondent’s own 20 parameter utility function. Descriptive statistics for each element of the PUF tasks are reported as well as distributions of the 20 parameters. Descriptive statistics from the various validation tasks built into the interview are reported and correlated with PUF data on a within-respondent basis to establishinternal face validity.Preference types identified in the dimension and level weighting tasks, and in the placement of dead, are identified and used to inform modelling. An average utility function will be calculated. Additionally cluster analysis will be applied to find whether there are typical groups of respondents.Results:Overall, PD and MO are the highest ranked dimensions (as is the case in many of the value sets generated using other methods) and UA is the lowest ranked dimension.There was a high level of consistency in respondents’responses to the various dimension-weighting tasks. The ratings for intermediate improvements in each dimension (e.g. from MO3 to MO2) shows heterogeneity, both within (i.e. most respondents’ratings differed between dimensions) and between respondents. The results of the validation exercises demonstrate that the PUF algorithm works as intended. The task to identify the individual’s location of dead within the descriptive system worked well.23.7% of respondentsindicated that no EQ-5D health states are worse than dead.The data allow the reporting of individual respondents’ PUFs, and a social value set to be constructed as an average of the PUFs.Conclusion: APUF approachis feasible, and haspotentialto (a) yield meaningful, well informed preference datafrom respondentsand (b) provide individual preference data that can be aggregatedto yield a value set for the EQ-5D. The deliberative approach to health state valuation which it entails also has the potential to complement and improve existing valuationmethods. Further improvementof some elements of the tasks are required, e.g., regarding interactions, and a more systematic approach to the capture and use of qualitative data would be beneficial.
