Background: Fatigue is one of the most common and burdensome symptoms for persons living with multiple sclerosis (MS), a chronic neurological condition affecting nearly one million adults in the U.S. The EQ-5D-5L instrument does not include a fatigue item, motivating efforts to develop a bolt-on. Aims: This formative qualitative research is a collaboration with U.S. adults living with MS (acceleratedcure.org). It will explore critical questions regarding the development of a fatigue bolt-on as well as potential gains in coverage and application for the EQ-5D-5L instrument. Aim 1: Which bolt-on wording and framing options best capture fatigue? Specifically:Do alternative labels (“fatigue”, “tiredness”, “worn out”, “exhaustion”) differ in clarity and relevance?Might the inclusion of patient-centered examples improve bolt-on performance?Does first-person phrasing (“feel” vs. “am”) affect bolt-on interpretation and response?Aim 2: Which bolt-ons are needed to extend the coverage of the EQ-5D-5L instrument? Specifically:What aspects of health-related quality of life are not covered by the EQ-5D-5L instrument?Do the candidate bolt-ons effectively capture important aspects of the lived experiences of individuals with fatigue, and how should these bolt-ons be prioritized?Does adding candidate bolt-ons change the interpretation and responses to the core items?We hypothesize that the current labels (“fatigue”) will outperform other labels while the inclusion of examples will enhance the comprehension of the instrument. Furthermore, we hypothesize that individuals living with MS will endorse appending the fatigue, vision, and cognition bolt-ons and that doing so does not affect their interpretation of or responses to the core items.Methods: This study will employ semi-structured qualitative interviews following the DSWG recommendations, standardised topic guide, and templates (N=20; acceleratedcure.org). These heterogeneous respondents serve as patient experts in fatigue due to their unique lived experience with MS. Diversity is needed to benefit from a wealth of perspectives (i.e., quota sampling by gender, age, disease severity). Interviews (Zoom) will be conducted by trained interviewers, and they will be audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim (otter.ai). The descriptive analysis will summarize the characteristics of the respondents. In the primary analysis, the open-ended responses will be coded (with 50% overlap) and analyzed thematically (Atlas.ti), and the ranking/optimization responses will be summarized in aggregate (R). This patient-centered study was designed to produce actionable recommendations that guide bolt-on development and the future use of the Bolt-on Toolbox.
