Purpose The EuroQol Health and Wellbeing Instrument (EQ-HWB) was designed as a broad, generic measure of quality-of-life suitable for caregivers. The experimental version is now available for researchers to validate in a range of populations. We aimed to investigate the use of the short form (EQ-HWB-S) in a population of caregivers of children where families had experienced adverse life events. Methods Using quantitative surveys and qualitative interviews we investigated the general performance, feasibility, content, convergent and known-groups validity, responsiveness to change and test-retest reliability of the EQ-HWB-S items and sum-scores in this population. The baseline survey had 234 caregivers (81% women, 38% born in Australia, 59% speaking English at home, and 51% with a Bachelor’s degree or higher); the 6-months dataset 174 cases. Twelve semi-structured interviews were analysed thematically. Results There was a good spread of responses across items, except for Item 1 (mobility) where few caregivers had mobility concerns. The EQ-HWB-S showed good convergent validity with psychological distress (K6) and personal wellbeing (PWI-A) scales. EQ-HWB-S sum-scores were statistically different in all known-groups analyses, as hypothesised. Change in EQ-HWB-S sum-scores was responsive to change in with psychological distress (K6) and personal wellbeing (PWI-A) and global health (SF-12 single item) but not changes in number of adversities. Interclass correlations for the EQ-HWB-S sum-score test-retest results were considered excellent; individual item Kappa scores were moderate. The instrument was well received by interviewees, who found the questions were clear and relevant. The items were appropriate for parents, in an adversity setting, and for carers of children with additional needs. Conclusion This study demonstrated that the EQ-HWB-S showed validity, was sensitive to change, feasible and well accepted by caregivers in this population. This study is a valuable contribution to validation of the EQ-HWB-S as it features participants that can be challenging to reach, making this study a valuable contribution to building the evidence for the broad use of this instrument.
