The EQ-5D-5L has been included in rigorously conducted representative general population surveys: those data could be leveraged for standardized population level assessment and cross-country comparison. We aimed to demonstrate and establish the methodology to report standardized EQ-5D-5L norms and inequalities in health at the population level. The EuroQol Group has confirmed funding for the POPS 2 project ‘Population Norms and Inequality Indicators based on EQ-5D-5L in General Population Surveys’. Before launching POPS 2, this methods pilot project (EQ Project 1600-RA) was set up to establish the methodology to measure norms and inequalities from existing representative EQ-5D-5L general population surveys. Methods were established using EQ-5D-5L data from respondents aged ≥18 years from two datasets: Health Survey of England 2018 (n=7,085) and Spanish National Health Survey 2011-2012 (n=20,732). Standardized population norm approaches included proportions reporting problems on EQ-5D dimensions, proportion reporting any problems on all dimensions, EQ VAS, EQ-5D-5L index values and level sum scores. Mean and proportion estimates, along with linearized standard errors, were reported across men and women for seven age groups. Methods to assess inequality included logistic regression odds ratios, polarity ratios and concentration indices. Results showed that the Spanish sample reported more favourable health in most gender and age subgroups compared to England. Men reported better health along all EQ-5D-5L measures in both countries with the LSS reflecting smaller differences than the index values. Without exception, all odds ratios showed robust evidence for the widespread existence of inequalities in self-reported problems along the EQ-5D-5L by key socioeconomic stratifiers after controlling for age in both countries. Given the experience from the English and Spanish data, these results support robust standardized reporting of population norms and inequality indicators based on EQ-5D-5L in general population surveys. Recommendations from this methodology pilot were discussed at the EuroQol Group’s Annual meeting, as well as at the subsequent ISPOR and ISOQOL conferences in 2024. Findings can be used both in the main POPS 2 project and relevant other EuroQol Group research projects, such as DAPHNE, that use general population sample-based data and reporting. Our project team is excited to use learnings from this pilot project as we proceed with the main POPS 2 project to explore population health based on EQ-5D-5L.
