Background and aim: The EQ Health and Wellbeing 9 is a new instrument that has undergone modification and testing with the aim to move from the current experimental status to approved effective status. Approved versions of any instrument require formal linguistic review and translation by translation agencies based on the appropriate forward and back translation (FT and BT) and cognitive debriefing with ranking exercise and proofreading. This project aims to support the translation of the ten most commonly requested languages for adult EQ instruments to prepare for the launch of the approved version. A secondary aim is to support researcher-led translations.  Methods: The ten most commonly requested languages (English - UK, USA, Australia, Canada; Spanish - Spain, USA; German, Simplified Chinese, French, Italian) have been identified by the Version Management Committee (VMC). An ISO-certified translation agency will be engaged to undertake formal translation of the finalised descriptive system of the EQ-HWB-9. In each language, linguistic review or translation will cover the self-complete (SC), interviewer-administered version (IA) and proxy 1 (P1). The initial translation will be for an English UK version which will be used as the source version for the other 9 languages. Available formally translated language versions will undergo linguistic review without FT and BT subject to there being no changes in the English source version, otherwise, full translation will be required. Cognitive debriefing will be undertaken with 8 participants (aged 18+, mixed gender and different socio-demographic strata and health conditions). VMC reviewers will support the translation process by reviewing reports from the translation agency at each stage of the translation.  Researcher-led translations will continue to be supported for languages that are not available. Researchers will undertake translations using EQ translation guides and processes developed by the VMC. This involves FT and BT, CD including ranking exercise and reporting on the findings including populating templates. VMC reviewers will undertake a light review of the results of the researcher-led translations before approval for use by the VMC liaison.  Outcome: Approved translations will be available for the EQ-HWB-9 for the ten most commonly requested languages with three modes of administration (SC, IA, P1) of each translation for the launch of the instrument.
