Over 2,000 studies including EuroQol instruments are published each year. Given the role of the EuroQol instruments in informing health care decision-making – both as a patient-reported outcome in clinical applications and in reimbursement and policy decisions – transparent and rigorous reporting is essential. However, there is substantial heterogeneity in reporting quality across studies. This project aims to develop a consensus-based reporting checklist for EuroQol instruments, including approved (EQ-5D-3L, EQ-5D-5L, EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L) as well as experimental instruments (EQ-HWB, EQ-HWB-S and EQ-TIPS), following the guidelines of the Enhancing the Quality and Transparency of Health Research (EQUATOR) Network (https://www.equator-network.org/). We envision the checklist to be generic covering all relevant study types that typically use the EuroQol instruments, including observational studies, randomised controlled trials, psychometric validation studies and cost-utility analyses. The checklist will cover key aspects of reporting methods (e.g. instrument details, administration, value set use) and data (e.g. sample size, missing data, descriptives). Candidate checklist items will be identified through a rapid literature review and refined through an iterative development process. This process will include a modified Delphi study involving EuroQol members and external experts, as well as a series of consensus meetings with our study team, which comprises a diverse group of international experts from multidisciplinary backgrounds and various geographical regions. The checklist is expected to improve reporting quality and, consequently, enhance our collective knowledge and evidence base available on EuroQol instruments, in line with the EuroQol Group’s mission to improve decisions about health and health care. Improving the quality of reporting is also important for future systematic reviews and meta-analyses, as these can inform ongoing instrument development initiatives (e.g. bolt-ons) and support post-approval monitoring of our instruments after they are launched e.g. the recently launched EQ-5D-Y-5L.
