Introduction: EuroQol Group has developed an experimental version of EQ-5D-Y-5L that has five severity levels for each dimension. The Younger Populations Working Group (YPWG) has expressed interest in evaluating psychometric performance in different childhood conditions considering of the views of children and their caregivers and potentially comparing EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L. Objective: To assess feasibility, test-retest reliability, responsiveness, known-group-validity and agreement between interviewer administration (IA) and proxy-report of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L among Ethiopian children with different disease conditions aged 5-8 years. Methods: Agreement, feasibility, test-retest reliability, responsiveness and known-group-validity of both EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L were assessed and compared among children aged 5–8 years. First, children self-reported their health state through IA and thereafter, parents/guardians completed the corresponding EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L proxy-1 report Amharic version. Administration of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L versions was randomized and separated by an age-appropriate demanding cognitive task/problem- solving algebra. Repeated measures were taken by IA and proxy-report to assess test-retest reliability (for unchanged health status) and responsiveness (for changed health status) after ten days and one month, respectively, using a one-item global rating (GRS) scale to assess change in health status. Agreement and test-retest reliability of dimension scores (using percent agreement, Gwet’s AC and Cohen’s) and for LSS and EQ-VAS (using ICC), known-group validity (using Kruskal-Wallis rank test), and responsiveness (using mean change, standardized effect size (SES)). Results: A total of 356 participants were included in the study: 163 from the general school children, 95 with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), and 98 with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM). Most participants were school-aged children (mean age ~6.5 years), with 52.08% males. The highest proportion of reported problems reported in the “Feeling worried/sad/unhappy” and “Pain/discomfort” dimensions of EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L, with proxy respondents consistently reporting fewer “no problems” responses than IA (χ² > 85, p < 0.001). Agreement between IA and proxy-reports ranging from moderate to almost perfect across all dimensions (Gwet’s AC = 0.61–0.91), with percent agreement between 67–91%. Known-group validity for both EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L was supported, with significant LSS differences across health conditions (χ² = 87.9–94.4, p < 0.001). Test–retest reliability (ICC) for IA and proxy LSS ranging from 0.62 to 0.80. Responsiveness was demonstrated in improved cases (n = 57), particularly for IA reports (ES = 1.04–1.18).  Conclusion: The EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L Amharic versions demonstrated good agreement and acceptable psychometric performance across IA and proxy-report. IA and proxy versions showed similar psychometric properties across all dimensions with greater variability for WSU and P/D. This study shows that both the Y-3L and Y-5L IA versions are valid and reliable for use in children aged 5-8 years where self-complete is not possible.
