AbstractBackground: The EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L are widely used generic measures of health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in children and adolescents. However, evidence on the content validity and acceptability of the instruments among adolescents with chronic conditions, particularly in low-income settings, remains limited. This study aimed to assess the acceptability and content validity of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and the EQ-5D-Y-5L among adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM) in Ethiopia.Methods: A qualitative study was conducted using semi-structured interviews with adolescents aged 12-17 years who were diagnosed with T1DM and had visited the diabetes clinic at Tikur Anbessa Specialized Hospital. Purposive sampling was used to recruit a breadth of participants with variation in age and sex. Interviews were conducted using an interview guide. First, concept elicitation was used to explore adolescents’ understanding of health and the aspects of health important to them. Then, adolescents completed the EQ-5D-Y-3L, EQ-5D-Y-5L, and EQ VAS, followed by cognitive interviewing to examine the comprehension, comprehensiveness, and relevance of the instruments. Interview data were analyzed using qualitative content analysis, and identified health concepts were mapped against the EQ-5D-Y-3L/5L descriptive system to assess comprehensiveness.Results: A total of 25 adolescents with a mean age of 14.6 years participated, and 13 (54.0%) of them were male. Adolescents primarily conceptualized health in terms of physical health, emotional and psychological well-being, functioning and daily activities, disease management and control, dietary management, and social functioning. Most of these concepts aligned well with the EQ-5D-Y-3L/5L dimensions. Both the Y-3L and Y-5L versions were generally perceived as easy to understand and complete, indicating good acceptability. However, some misinterpretations, including broad interpretations of the mobility and looking after myself dimensions, challenges with the recall period (“today”), and difficulty selecting precise values on the EQ VAS were noted. Several important health aspects were identified as missing from the EQ-5D-Y, including diabetes self-management, dietary management, treatment burden, and social relationships. Most participants preferred the EQ-5D-Y-5L due to its greater descriptive detail, while some favoured the EQ-5D-Y-3L for its simplicity.Conclusion: The EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L demonstrate good acceptability and capture key generic aspects of health relevant to adolescents with T1DM in Ethiopia. However, for this patient group, important diabetes-specific and social aspects of health are not captured within the EQ-5D-Y-3L/5L descriptive system. These findings support the use of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L as generic measures of HRQoL and could be beneficial to combine with disease-specific instruments in this population.
