This project aimed to generate EQ-5D-3L population norms for China; to investigate inequalities in health across social determinants of health; and to describe changes in population health between 2008 and 2018. We had planned to use three waves of the largest national representative population health survey data – National Health Services Survey (NHSS). We had obtained data access (oral) approval from NHSS data PI (also co-investigators on this project: Yaoguang Zhang and Ling Xu) at the time of submitting the proposal (Oct 2020). However, our access to the data was delayed due to several rounds of domestic COVID-19 outbreaks in China and domestic travel restrictions, particularly to Beijing. The NHSS data centre is located in Beijing and all the analyses are required to be done on-site at NHSS data facilities. In November 2021, China released new regulations on data sharing and data security, particularly for projects supported by international organization/funds. All NHSS data access approvals have been escalated to Vice Minister level. During the similar period, the NHSS PI has been promoted to other departments and left NHSS data center. We have made every effort to explore a number of options for completing the project as proposed, including: our Chinese colleagues undertaking the analyses on-site at Ministry of Health secure data facilities, under supervision, and strictly limiting any sharing to results tables/statistical output; providing an official support letter from Nanjing Medical University (where co-PI Jiaying is based) to the NHSS data center for internal clearance; and several efforts at personal correspondence with MoH officials. Unfortunately, the circumstances appear to restrict all potential uses of NHSS data for research purposes (i.e. for both domestic and international research), and all avenues of further enquiry have been exhausted. In August 2022 we informed the senior scientist and our advisors about these issues, and in Oct 2022 we submitted a memo to the Exec on this issue. We considered a number of options for using alternative regional data sets, but none would have allowed us to fully achieve what we had originally proposed to do before access to the national health survey data was denied. We consider the best option is to cancel the project so the funds can be released for other uses. We have had made quite a bit of progress in producing an SAP, hosting the first advisory group meeting (in June 2021) and quite detailed outline/draft papers, up until the point the data access was withdrawn. We have included those materials as attachment, in case they are useful for future projects. We thank the Exec and office for their understanding about the circumstances affecting this work.
