Aims: Recall periods are an important aspect of content validity for measures about health and well-being. The literature on recall periods for proxy-reported versions of patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) is poorly developed compared to the literature on recall periods for PROMs. This project aimed to evaluate the perceptions of carers with dementia on the 7-day recall period for the proxy version of the EQ-HWB-9. Methods: Two mixed-methods studies were conducted with carers of people living with dementia in Australia, evaluating the recall period for the proxy version of the EQ-HWB-9 (V1.0 and V2.0). Think-aloud interviews were used for the qualitative studies, and participants were prompted to reflect on their interpretation of the recall period, the proxy perspective they used. Thematic analysis was used. To evaluate the content validity of V2.0, framework analysis was used, with a pre-defined framework mapped against components of content validity. In the quantitative studies, participants were randomly assigned to the EQ-HWB-9 with a 7-day or 1-day (“today”) recall period. At the end of the survey participants were asked to indicate the proxy perspective and recall period they used when completing the questionnaire. Results: Forty-one participants completed interviews (19 for V1.0, 22 for V2.0) and 282 participants completed online surveys (147 for V1.0, 135 for V2.0). In the qualitative studies, most carers were able to recall relevant observations of the person with dementia within the 7-day recall period across the EQ-HWB- domains. Events occurring outside the recall period or the normality of the past 7 days were also considered by carers. The EQ-HWB-9 (v2) was comprehensible, though specific items were more difficult for carers to answer as proxies due to the constructs being less observable. In the quantitative studies, adherence to the recall period was not consistent. Most participants used a 7-day period regardless of assignment. Adherence was slightly higher in the survey using V2.0. In all studies, participants reported using a mix of proxy perspectives. Conclusion: The findings provide support for the use of the 7-day recall period used in the EQ-HWB-9 proxy version in dementia. Repetition of the recall period, as seen in the  EQ-HWB-9 (V2.0) proxy version, may help promote adherence. The use of a mix of proxy perspectives suggests that clear instructions regarding perspective-taking may be beneficial.
