Background: During consultations on the development of the EQ-5D-Y value set, Canadian stakeholders recommended that preferences be elicited from children and adolescents using discrete choice experiments (DCEs).  Objective: To understand the feasibility of directly eliciting health state preferences from Canadian children and adolescents using DCE. Methods: A convergent parallel mixed methods study was conducted among a purposeful sample of Canadian youth (13-18 years) separated by age and sex. First, participants completed an online survey with the EQ-5D-Y-5L, 13 DCE tasks using EQ-5D-Y-5L health states (all participants), and three DCE with duration tasks (15-18 years only). Then, they engaged in a focus group discussion on their experience with the online survey. Quantitative data on DCE feasibility indicators (i.e., incompletion, speeding, flatlining, violation of dominant choice task) were analysed using descriptive statistics. Qualitative focus group data were analysed using content analysis. The findings from the qualitative and quantitative components of the study were integrated narratively. Results: Six focus groups with a total of 36 children and adolescents (n = 6 per focus group) were conducted. The average time to complete all DCE tasks was 7 minutes (range 3 – 12). In the focus group discussions, all participants reported that they understood both the DCE and DCE with duration tasks, and had minimal issues with engagement and use of the online technology. This was confirmed by the quantitative data on feasibility indicators, which found no incomplete tasks, speeding, flatlining, or wrong answers to the dominant choice task. A few participants mentioned challenges in imagining hypothetical health states, but most of the group discussions focused on minor issues with the presentation (e.g., not noticing the bolding that differentiates health states) and framing (e.g., imagining someone older instead of themself in a health state) of the DCE tasks. Participants reported that these issues could cause them to answer the survey questions differently. Conclusion: Both the qualitative and quantitative data indicate that the direct use of DCE and DCE with duration is feasible among Canadian children and adolescents. There are minor issues with the presentation and framing of DCE tasks, which have the potential to cause heterogeneity in preferences, and could be improved. These findings can inform the design of the EQ-5D-Y-5L valuation study in Canada.
