Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate performance, test-retest reliability, and validity of the interviewer-administered (IA) and self-completion (SC) versions of the EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S. Respondents and methods: A longitudinal survey was carried out in Bandung, Indonesia. After translating the two EQ-HWB versions into Indonesian language, we interviewed 300 respondents (200 literate, 50 illiterate-low literacy, and 50 patients) with varying socio-demographics using a think-aloud concurrent protocol. The full sample of literate and patient groups completed both the IA and SC versions, while the illiterate samples completed only the IA version. The IA and SC paper-and-pencil questionnaires included the following outcome measures: EQ-HWB, EQ-5D-5L, Warwick-Edinburgh Mental Wellbeing Scale (WEMWBS), along with socio-demographic and clinical characteristic questions. The 25-item EQ-HWB was used, and the EQ-HWB-S responses were derived from it. Index values were calculated using the pilot UK (EQ-HWB-S) and Indonesian (EQ-5D-5L) value sets. The psychometric properties assessed included ceiling and floor effects, convergent validity with corresponding items and scales of other outcome measures, known-group validity (Mann-Whitney U Test), and test-retest reliability (Gwet’s AC2 coefficients and intraclass correlations [ICC]). All respondents completed the EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S two times with a 2-week interval for test-retest analysis. Furthermore, known groups were defined by criteria such as full sample with EQ VAS scores < 80 and ≥ 80 and patient vs non-patient sample. Results: Overall, the final sample included 300 respondents (aged 39.22 ± 15.81): 200 literate, 50 illiterate, and 50 patients, with 62.67% females. Among the 25 items of the EQ-HWB, ceiling effects ranged from 24.0% (‘Exhaustion’) to 86.33% (‘Hearing’), with five items showing ceiling effects and four items showing floor effects. The EQ-HWB-S items exhibited lower ceiling effects, with only one item (‘Getting around inside and outside’: 71.67%) showing a ceiling effect and no item displaying a floor effect. At instrument level, 13 respondents (4.33%) reported the best responses on all EQ-HWB items and 24 (8.00%) reported the worst responses on all EQ-HWB-S items, respectively. Excellent agreement was observed when comparing self-completion and interviewer-administered methods, with the highest agreement for items like ‘Getting around inside and outside’ (AC2 = 0.95) and the lowest for ‘Anxiety’ (AC2 = 0.50). Convergent validity was confirmed for conceptually overlapping items, such as EQ-HWB-S 'Getting around inside and outside' and EQ-5D-5L 'Mobility' (r= 0.77), EQ-HWB-S 'Anxiety' and EQ-5D-5L 'Anxiety/Depression' (r = 0.70), and EQ-HWB 'Personal Care' and EQ-5D-5L 'Self-Care' (r = 0.60). EQ-HWB level summary scores also showed strong correlations with the EQ-5D-5L level summary score, EQ-VAS, and WEMWBS. Both EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S LSS and index scores showed significant discrimination across groups based on EQ-VAS scores and patient status. Conclusion: This is the first study to validate the EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S with both patients and members of the general public in Indonesia. It is also the first to evaluate the performance of these instruments across different literacy levels using IA and SC versions. Our findings contribute to the increasing body of positive psychometric evidence supporting the EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S.
