Background: The EQ-5D-5L is a widely used measure of people’s quality of life relating to their health (HRQoL). The EQ-5D-5L questionnaire is used among many populations with different medical conditions, but has been criticized for missing some important aspects of health for some specific populations, such as those with sleep disorder. The EQ-5D-5L descriptive system can be adapted to incorporate ‘bolt-on’ descriptors in order to improve measurement sensitivity and relevance in certain contexts as a solution. EuroQol is planning to develop a Bolt-on Toolbox containing several bolt-ons, one of which is sleep problems. However, so far, no definitive sleep bolt-on has been developed in accordance with EuroQol protocols and guidance for bolt-on identification, development and testing. Aims and Objectives: Our research proposal aims to identify and develop a single sleep bolt-on item for inclusion in the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox. We aim to develop a bolt-on item that is relevant across diverse populations living with sleep problems (e.g. those with mental illness, chronic pain, asthma or diabetes), as well as for individuals with specific sleep disorders such as obstructive sleep apnea or insomnia. Development work plan: The study will use mixed qualitative and quantitative methods that have built on learning from previous and ongoing work on developing and testing bolt-on descriptors for cognition, vision, sleep and hearing, and draws from the developmental work for the EQ-HWB. The study will have three phases. These will be delivered one after the other. The full programme is expected to take 18 months. Phase 1 aims to identify experiences and potential items related to sleep problems for Phase 2. Phase 1 will have two components: 1A and 1B. Phase 1A will include a scoping literature review to understand existing evidence about the experiences of people with sleep problems, and identify existing items that measure this. We will liaise with EuroQol colleagues who have done systematic reviews of bolt-on items to EQ-5D-5L and EQ-5D-3L to improve efficiency of our review. Phase 1B will refine the candidate items identified in Phase 1A through interviews with people who have sleep disorder and people with other chronic diseases that cause sleep problems. Phase 2 will include one to one interviews to assess how acceptable the potential items are to people with sleep disorders and people with other chronic diseases that cause sleep problems, and how well they describe their HRQoL. Phase 3 will assess how well the items work in larger and more diverse samples of people. An online survey will be conducted to assess how well the candidate items work among a group of people with sleep disorders and people with other chronic diseases that cause sleep problems (around 300 participants) and the general population in the UK (around 300 participants).
