TTO data from recent EQVT valuation studies displays troubling patterns, including spikes at 1, .5, 0, -.5, and -1; a lack of non-integer year responses; high levels of logically inconsistent responses, and possible censoring of values below .5 or 0 for a number of respondents. The (ping-pong) routing, has been suggested as part of the reason for the observed spikes. This proposal is submitted under the umbrella of the ongoing effort to improve the EQ-VT system, and aims to determine if two approaches to altering the routing procedure may improve the data quality, particularly in terms of reduced spikes and reduced level of inconsistent responses The alternative procedures are based on the observation that the spikes of elicited values correspond to respondents stating indifference very early in the current TTO routing. At least two distinct effects may contribute to this: satisficing (i.e. respondents stating indifference early in order to shorten the task), anda form of sequential anchoring (inadequate adjustment from the values presented in the TTO task). The two modifications we suggest testing are1) Randomized starting point and routing:Reducing the danger of routing-specific bias through randomizing respondents to a range of different routing procedures. If anchoring and satisficing is at play in all conceivable routing procedures, introducing a variety of routes will distribute the overall bias, so that the common variance across different routing procedures should be a less biased measure of net preferences.As a benefit, varied routing may enable analyses to determine to what extent values are censored at 0.2) Non-stopping TTO:Satisficing is a problem in TTO because the procedure ends as soon as respondents state indifference, creating an incentive for stating indifference at values corresponding to early choices. The second modification attempts to remove this incentive through forcing respondents to perform the same amount of work for all possible elicited values. This is achieved by not stoppingthe preference elicitation once a point of indifference is identified. Deliverables: (1) report to the Exec/VMWG with description findings and suggestions for how to handle routing in the EQVT, (2) Scientific paper on routing bias and satisficing effects in TTO valuation, (3) paper on a non-stopping TTO, and (4) paper on censoring.
