Objectives: The EuroQol Toddlers and Infant Populations (EQ-TIPS) was developed as a generic health-related quality of life (HRQoL) instrument for children aged 0 - 3 years. While the EQ-TIPS V3 has been used in various high-income settings across different disease with promising results, research in resource-poor settings has been limited. The aim of this work was to crossculturally adapt and validate the EQ-TIPS into Chichewa for Malawi. Methods: EQ-TIPS was forward translated into Chichewa and back translated into English by two sets of translators. The translated version was reviewed by a member of the EuroQol version management committee and after several iterations, an agreement was reached for a consensus version. The version was piloted through cognitive debriefing with five caregivers of infants and children aged 0-3 years two of which tow were at home and three in hospital. Changes were made accordingly based on their feedback to inform the next version. Results: The translation process was relatively straightforward although two items: “managing emotions” and ”interacting with others” were found to be difficult concepts to translate accurately. Further, we found that adding a pronoun such as he/she to response levels was necessary in comparison with the source language standalone options. Cognitive debriefing (CD) indicated that combining both “kumasuka (freeness)” and “kulankhulana (speaking)” would be ideal to accurately translate “interacting with others” which was also noted during translation. Additionally, CD identified issues with translation of ”sleep”, “pain”, and “managing emotions” items. For sleep, some respondents suggested that the examples included to explain the concept referred to different phases of sleep thereby making it difficult to rate it. Kuphwanya m’thupi (pain) was suggested to be replaced with ‘kupweteka’ or ‘kuwawa’ which also refers to pain but thought to be more age-appropriate translation for infants and toddlers. The EQ-5D-Y versions, however, uses “Kuphwanya m’thupi” for “pain” because they carry the thought of someone ably expressing pain for themselves as opposed to a proxy version. Lastly, it was suggested that “dongosolo la malingaliro” (managing emotions) may benefit from expansion of examples. For example, adding ‘ngati mwana amatha kuonetsa mkwiyo (unhappy), chisoni (sadness), chisangalalo (happiness)’ would enrich the meaning. Conclusion: These are only preliminary results of the EQ-TIPS Chichewa version for Malawi. The next steps will be to refine the items and come up with a final approved version. As this is the first study, to the knowledge of the team, attempting to establish a conceptual and linguistic equivalence of the EQ-TIPS into an African spoken language outside South Africa, this work will not only be useful to EuroQol’s Strategic Plan but also other settings. The study found that observable items were more easier to translate and understand as opposed to emotional items. The underlying cause for this could be due to a limited vocabularly of the Chichewa language which may be a common thread for the Bantu languages spoken in most of the sub-Saharan 2 of 3 Africa. As such, some emotional concepts such as pain, may be adapted with more examples for younger children in these settings.
