The EQ-5D instruments were designed as generic measures applicable across diverse health conditions and populations. Although they capture key aspects of health-related quality of life (HRQoL), they may not reflect all relevant impacts or improvements in specific groups. This limitation has prompted growing interest in extending the EQ-5D descriptive system by adding dimensions and items, known as EQ-5D bolt-ons. An experimental version of the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox has been developed for the EQ-5D-5L to supplement measurement in specific clinical contexts. Given its experimental nature, psychometric testing is required.This project addresses the DSWG’s priorities in the latest call for proposals by testing the psychometric performance of multiple EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox items (including fatigue, hearing, sleep, vision, and an earlier versions of the cognition bolt-on) in older adults in China, and by generating evidence to support the further development of the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox—particularly the cognition bolt-ons.The proposal builds on a piggyback data collection opportunity, incorporating the EQ-5D-5L and bolt-on items into the Early Dementia and Depression Screening Project for Adults Aged 65 and Older in Nanjing City, China, conducted by the Nanjing CDC. The survey employs a multistage, stratified cluster random sampling strategy, covering 12,000 adults aged 65 years and above from 12 districts (1,000 respondents per district) in Nanjing. The survey also includes the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), AD8 Dementia Screening Interview, PHQ-9, and self-reported questions on chronic conditions, sleep problems, and physical activity. The survey, including EQ-5D-5L and bolt-on items, are administered via face-to-face interviews. Data collection commenced in June 2025 and is expected to be completed by the end of 2025.We will conduct psychometric analyses of multiple EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox items in older adults in China, examining ceiling effects, divergent and convergent validity, known-group validity, and explanatory power, for individual items, and in combination and with EQ-5D-5L. We will further validate several alternative cognition bolt-ons from the Toolbox using analyses such as known-group validity testing, confirmatory factor analysis, principal component analysis, and uniform and non-uniform differential item functioning (DIF).As of end of Sep 2025, data has been collected for over 10,00 participants. We will provide timely evidence on the validity of multiple EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox items in older adults in China. Findings from this study will provide evidence on the use of bolt-ons to extend the EQ-5D-5L in specific contexts and inform future development of the Bolt-on Toolbox. This proposal strengthens the existing collaboration between the Nanjing CDC and the EuroQol Research Foundation, to support the collection, analysis, and use of EQ-5D measures in China.
