Background: Despite being a safe and effective treatment for sustained weight loss, bariatric surgery (BS) remains largely underutilized in many countries while a proportion of BS recipients reported decisional regret after receiving the surgery. The low utilization rate and the decision dissonance among BS recipients suggest that the current decision quality is suboptimal. As clinical benefit is not the sole factor for patients considering undergoing or rejecting BS, a PtDA that includes both the clinical benefits and changes in HRQoL could help patients make a quality decision. Aim: This project aims to explore the potential of an EQ-5D-based PtDA in improving decision-making of individuals considering bariatric surgery. The specific objectives are:   To understand the perspectives, preferences, and experiences of obese individuals or patients (referred to as ‘patients’ for simplicity hereafter) considering or having received or rejected bariatric surgery and healthcare professionals who provide consultation or counselling services to these patients. To identify the preoperative predictors of postoperative EQ-5D outcomes of patients who underwent BS. To identify the baseline predictors of EQ-5D outcomes of obese patients who receive non-surgical treatment. To develop an EQ-5D-based PtDA. To evaluate the effectiveness of the PtDA via a pilot study.  Methods: This project consists of five studies. Study 1 –Qualitative interviews will be conducted with patients considering or having rejected or received BS to understand the health and non-health dimensions of quality of life that are important to obese patients, factors affecting their decisions while selecting a weight-loss strategy, postoperative experiences, information needs for decision-making, preferred decision-making mode, and preferred way of information presentation. Qualitative interviews will also be conducted with healthcare professionals who provide consultation or counselling to obese patients considering bariatric surgery.  Study 2 – Clinical and demographic data and routinely collected EQ-5D data of patients who received BS will be analyzed to identify the preoperative predictors of post-operative EQ-5D outcomes. Preoperative and postoperative EQ-5D data has been collected routinely from BS patients since October 2021 as part of clinical care indicators. It is estimated that preoperative and postoperative EQ5D data from approximately 200 patients will be available before the initiation of Study 3. Study 3 – A cross-sectional survey will be conducted with adult patients who are qualified for bariatric surgery but was on non-surgical treatment. Analysis will be conducted to understand the baseline predictors and the magnitude of improvement in EQ-5D outcomes 3 to 6 months after treatment.  Study 4 – A web-based PtDA will be developed. The input information, algorithms, and output information will be based on the findings from Studies 1 and 2. Comprehensibility, acceptability, feasibility, and usability of the PtDA will be assessed. The PtDA will be finalized based on the results. Study 5 – The effectiveness of the PtDA on decision quality, conflict, preparedness, and regret as well as, shared decision-making will be pilot tested by comparing a comparison arm (consisting of patients before the PtDA is introduced to the study site) and an intervention arm (consisting of patients after the PtDA is introduced).
