Background: Health state valuations provided by patients (i.e. experienced-based preferences) and non­ patients are generally not the same. Ultimately, the decision of which health-state values to use is a normative one, and research into the similarities and differences of values obtained from both perspectives is generated as basis for such decision. Thus far, the discussion has largely overlooked the fact that general population samples are very heterogeneous and comprise many respondents in impaired health states. Similar as patients, these respondents have a unique vantage (or reference) point that can influence their preferences. This potential source of bias is usually not recognized and even when it is acknowledged, the empirical implications are not investigated. This study seeks to address this issue by investigating the existence and empirical relevance of health state reference dependency in health state valuations. Methods: The reference dependency hypothesis is tested in a discrete choice experiment (DCE). A Bayesian DCE design consisting of 8 sets of 24 (matched pairwise) choice tasks was used, each set providing full identification of the EQ5D parameters for individual respondents. Mixed logit models were used to estimate the utility decrements associated with the severity levels in each dimension of the EQ5D. Reference dependency was subsequently modeled relative to respondents' own (self-assessed) EQ-5O health states using 5 additional parameters. These reference dependency parameters capture, separately for each EQ5D dimension, the multiplicative increase or decrease in health state utility as a result of valuing health state levels that are better than or equal to respondents' own health. Results: The DCE was administered to a Dutch nationally representative sample of 799 respondents. The majority of respondents in our sample was in good health, reflected by the share reporting problems in any of the dimensions: 24% in MO, 4% in SC, 27% in VA, 48% in PD and 22% in AD. Modeling the respondents' choices without taking reference dependency into account produced statistically significant and logically consistent parameter estimates. When reference dependency was taken into account, statistically significant and consistent parameters estimates were obtained for all severity levels and reference dependency parameters, except for self-care (where 96% of the sample reported not to have any health problems). Our results indicate that respondents in impaired health lower than or equal to the health state levels under evaluation have, on average, approximately 30% smaller health-state decrements. Despite these differences, a correction for reference dependency did not result in a social tariff with stronger health-state decrements; in fact, the social tariffs obtained from the models with and without reference dependency are close to identical. Conclusion: The results confirm our hypothesis that reference dependency can be observed in a random sample from the general population. On the one hand, reference dependency is found to have a major impact on respondents' individual preferences. On the other hand, the limited number of respondents with health impairments does not appear to bias the social tariff as obtained from a random sample of the general population, which is reassuring evidence.
