Unnecessary hospital readmissions are a major challenge for all health systems. If patients at high risk for readmission can be identified early, effective interventions exist that can prevent episodes. Previous prediction models tend to rely on administrative data and have reasonable predictive ability. Previous studies have suggested Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs) could improve these predictions, but have tended to be in smaller samples of patients with specific conditions.  This project proposes to use data from British Columbia, where surveys have been conducted on large numbers (~25,000) of patients discharged from inpatient care, asking the EQ-5D-5L along with demographics. In our earlier work (funded by the EuroQol group), we found that the EQ-5D-5L improved predictions of high cost users (presented at 2023 Plenary).  In this study, we seek to extend this work by:  Assessing the performance of models to predict unplanned hospital re-admissions within 1-year of completion of the EQ-5D-5L and Compare the performance of predictive models with and without EQ-5D-5L data  We will further:  Explore the prediction models in various patient subgroups with specific ages and clinical diagnoses (e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; heart failure). Evaluate whether the performance of the predictive models vary across groups of the population defined by levels of neighborhood income which is used as an equity stratifier.   Our analysis will use the BC Acute Inpatient survey data, linked with health administrative databases, including the Discharge Abstract Database (hospital separations), National Ambulatory Care Reporting System (emergency department, day surgeries, and day clinics), Medical Services Plan (physician services), PharmaNet (prescription medications and medical supplies), and Home and Community Care (long-term care and assisted living).  We will develop logistic regression, LASSO and random forest models for outcomes based first on only administrative data, and then adding the EQ-5D-5L. We will use cross-validation to select best performing models and assess comparative model performance by using discrimination, calibration and decision curve analysis. For final models, we will conduct subgroup analysis based on disease and age groups. We will also explore predictive performance across subgroups of patients based on their neighbourhood income decile that we are using in this analysis as an equity stratifier. This will allow us to explore whether predictive performance varies across these subgroups, and consider the equity impacts when choosing our final predictive model.  We hypothesize that including PROMs will improve the predictive performance of models, justifying the routine collection of the EQ-5D-5L post hospital discharge to inform readmission predictions.
