Objectives: The EQ-Health and Wellbeing Short version (EQ-HWB-S) is a newly developed measure designed to assess health and wellbeing outcomes in economic evaluations of healthcare, social care, and public health interventions from the perspective of service users, patients, and their caregivers. As a comprehensive measure of health and wellbeing, it is essential to evaluate the psychometric performance of the EQ-HWB-S, particularly in the context of mental health. This study aims to directly compare the performance of the EQ-HWB-S with two commonly used instruments: the EQ-5D-5L, a widely used generic measure of health-related quality of life, and the Recovering Quality of Life – Utility Index (ReQoL-UI), a condition-specific measure developed for individuals with mental health conditions. Comparisons are conducted in both the general population and among individuals with self-reported mental health problems. Methods: Data were used from an online survey administered to a representative sample of Australian general population aged 18 years and more including those with a mental health problem. Respondents completed the EQ-HWB-S, ReQoL-UI, EQ-5D-5L and Kessler psychological distress 6 items (K6) in a random order, followed by demographic questions, questions about current and past experience with mental health problems. We compared the measures in terms of convergent validity at instrument and item levels using Spearman’s rank correlation based on a validated clinical measure of psychological distress (Kessler 6 items). Known-group validity was assessed between groups with and without mental health problems using self-reported mental illness and the K6 scores with a clinical threshold of 19 or higher. Item Response Theory analysis was conducted based on graded response models after an explanatory factor analysis. Results: The psychometric analysis was conducted using a representative sample of 3,052 Australians. The EQ-HWB-S, ReQoL and EQ-5D-5L demonstrated convergent validity when compared against the K6. Notably, the EQ-HWB-S exhibited superior convergent validity, with all items of K6 moderately or highly correlated with the psychological items of EQ-HWB-S. Regarding the known-group validity, most EQ-HWB-S, ReQoL, EQ-5D-5L items demonstrated discriminative ability among known groups with mental health problems. Item Response Theory (IRT) analysis indicated that most items of the EQ-HWB-S, ReQoL and EQ-5D-5L had well-functioning response categories; however, several items showed evidence of differential item functioning. Conclusion: Preliminary findings using a large representative sample of Australians aged 18 and above support the legitimacy of the EQ-HWB-S as a potential outcome measure for mental health and well-being. Specifically, our findings show a convergence between EQ-HWB-S and the K6 while the EQ-HWB-S performed well in differentiating among individuals with mental health problems.
