Background: Patient-Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs) capture individuals’ perceptions of their health, including Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL). The EQ-5D-Y is a widely used instrument for children and adolescents, but evidence on its feasibility and psychometric performance in 5–8-year-olds, as well as the comparison of the 3L and 5L versions, is limited.Objectives: To evaluate comprehension, feasibility, validity, and reliability of the Interviewer-administered (IA) EQ-5D-Y (3L and 5L) versions of in children aged 5–8.Methods: A mixed-methods study will be conducted in the largest pediatric hospital in Argentina (Hospital Garrahan). 1) Qualitative component: After piloting the interview guide, cognitive interviews with 15 children with an oncological diagnosis will assess comprehension and response differentiation in the Y-3L and Y-5L, as well as VAS interpretation. 2) Quantitative component: a) After piloting the interview and procedures, thecross-sectional psychometric testing will involve personal interviews with 100 children (50 hospitalized, 50 outpatients) with oncological conditions, each completing IA EQ-5D-Y –3L and 5L in a random order,  PedsQL Cancer Module, a Global Health Measure, and an ad-hoc comprehension test. b) Test–retest reliability will be assessed after 2 days to 2 weeks in a sub-sample of 50 stable children. Qualitative interviews will be recorded, transcribed and analysed thematically, to understand feasibility and comprehension qualitatively. Quantitative analysis will assess convergent validity between HRQoL measures with Pearson Correlation, ANOVA, as well as known-group validity, as well as test-retest reliability using ICC and Kappa. Feasibility and comprehension will also be assessed in this quantitative phase (both by directly observing child behavior during the interview as well as by the ad-hoc comprehension test). Due to our ongoing work in children with cancer with the Garrahan Hospital team, the study feasibility is high. Expected Outcomes: The results of this study will inform the EQ-5D-Y 3L and 5L user guides to inform the age range where self-report is valid and reliable by IA. It will further provide useful evidence on whether young children are able to understand and recall the expanded 5 levels of report of the Y-5L as compared to the Y-3L.
