Objectives: The international valuation protocol for the EQ-5D-Y-3L has generated a growing interest in developing the value set. However, there remain important methodological and normative issues related to whether and how to value child health. This qualitative study was aimed to understand the views of Canadian stakeholders on these important issues. Methods: Stakeholders from health technology assessment (HTA) agencies, pharmaceutical industry, healthcare providers, and academia were invited to attend online interview. Semi-structured interviews were designed to focus on: (1) comparing the EQ-5D-Y-3L versus Y-5L; (2) source of preferences for child health valuation (adults vs children); (3) perspective for framing the valuation task; and (4) methods for the valuation (discrete choice experiment [DCE] and its variants vs time trade-off [TTO]). Participants were probed to consider HTA guidelines, cognitive capacity, and potential ethical concerns. All interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim. Framework analysis with the incidence density method was used to analyze the data. Results: 15 interviews were conducted between May and September 2022. 66.7% (n=10) of the participants had experience with economic evaluations, and 86.7% (n=13) were parents. 11 (73%) participants preferred the EQ-5D-Y-5L to the 3L. 12 (80%) participants suggested that adolescents should be directly involved in child health valuation from their own perspective. The participants were split on the ethical concerns. 8 participants (53.3%) did not think that there is ethical concern. 11 (73%) participants preferred DCE to TTO. When asked their preference between DCE with duration and DCE with death, 6 participants preferred the DCE with duration as the duration dimension was more realistic than an immediate death option. Conclusions: Most of Canadian stakeholders supported eliciting preferences of adolescents directly from their own perspective for child health valuation. DCE was considered a better method if adolescents are directly involved.
