Introduction: Best-Worst Scaling is increasingly used to provide a tariff – a set of “preference based values” for instruments used in public priority-setting. However, the type of BWS – “Case 2” – used for several instruments recently has not been established, only assumed, to provide scores that are linearly related to those that would have been obtained from traditional choice models that require the respondent to choose between whole health/quality of life states. This study is the first robust test of this assumption. Using a unique overall design, it calculates how respondents “rescale” Case 2 “degrees of disutility” into a whole health state in order to make between-state comparisons. Methods: Three hundred and eighty respondents from an internet panel answered a combination of twenty five bestworst tasks and paired comparisons containing EQ-5D-5L health descriptions. The data was analyzed using descriptive statistics, conditional logit models and advanced econometric models and stratified by level of impairment. Results: Pain/discomfort and mobility are for both DCE (23.9%, 23.9%) and BWS (24.4%, 23.3%) the attributes with the highest weight. For the DCE (23.6%) anxiety/depression is has a higher weight than for BWS (18.1%). There is a high correlation between the aggregate coefficients of DCE and BWS (ρ=0.9). However, after rescaling the DCE data with the BWS data the importance of the attributes from the DCE is considerably reduced to zero compared to BWS ranging with a factor from 0.28 for anxiety/depressionto 0.11 for self-care. Discussion: Case 2 BWS scores are related to those from a traditional DCE. However, respondents appear to apply different weights to the attributes, particularly if they have experience of impairment on one or more of these. This may prove to be a strength: it provides insights into, and quantification of, the phenomenon of experienced utility, whereby adaptation effects influence a person’s preference base scores. Conclusion: Replication of these findings may illustrate how a standardized health/quality of life instrument can act as both a national preference-based instrument for priority-setting and a patient reported outcome measure (PROM) for use within specific areas of medicine. Key words: best-worst scaling, discrete choice experiments; EQ-5D, health status, health-related quality-of life, health state preferences; utilities;
