Introduction: Physical inactivity, tobacco smoking, high body mass index and hazardous alcohol consumption are risk factors for poor health. However, their relationship with the EQ-5D, a commonly used measure of general health status, is poorly understood. This study examines the relationship between these factors, both individually and in combination, with the EQ-5D-3L. Methods: Data from the Prospective Outcomes of Injury Study (n=2856) was analysed using multi-variable logistic regression modelling to examine pre-injury relationships between physical activity, tobacco smoking, body mass index and alcohol consumption and each of the five EQ-5D dimensions. Logistic regression modelling was also used to calculate the predicted probability of problems within each of the EQ-5D dimensions for each possible combination of the four behavioural risk factors (i.e. 16 possible combinations were examined for each of the five dimensions). Graphs were produced to show the 16 combinations of risk factors with each of the dimensions. This appears to be a novel approach in terms of presenting EQ-5D findings. Results: Physical inactivity was associated with being more likely to have problems with mobility. Tobacco smoking was associated with being less likely to have problems with pain or discomfort whereas high alcohol consumption was associated with being more likely to have problems with pain or discomfort. Body mass index was not associated with any of the EQ-5D dimensions. However, the combination of obesity and physical inactivity (with or without the other behavioural risk factors) corresponded to a larger probability of problems in almost all dimensions. Conclusions: Our results support earlier findings that large scale population studies should consider collecting information about key behavioural factors alongside EQ-5D health outcomes. It also appears useful to consider specific combinations of behavioural risk factors when assessing general health status using the EQ-5D.
