Objectives: The objectives of this study are to assess and compare the feasibility, distributional characteristics, discriminatory power, and measurement properties of the Tigrinya versions of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L in healthy children and children with a range of health conditions.Methods:The EQ-5D-Y-3L, EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-5L were adapted into Tigrinya (a semitic language spoken by approximately 9 million native speakers, primarily in Ethiopia and Eritrea) following the EuroQol Version Management Committee guidelines. The feasibility, distributional properties, discriminatory power, and known groups’ validity, and children’s preferences for Y-3L and Y-5L were tested in samples of acute and chronic patients, and a general population sample. Test-retest reliability and responsiveness were assessed in a sub-group of the initial sample who reported unchanged health status and changed health status) after 10 days and one month, respectively, using a one-item global rating (GRS) scale to assess change in health status. Test–retest reliability was assessed using Gwet’s agreement coefficient (Gwet’s AC) and intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). Kruskal-Wallis rank test was used to examine known-group validity and responsiveness was evaluated using standardized effect-size (SES).Results: A total of 480 participants were included in the study. The mean (SD) age was 13.20 (3.05) years. Most of participants reported no problems, with the highest ceiling observed in the SC/LAM and Mob dimensions. The A/D/WSU and P/D dimensions showed the highest proportion of reported problems compared to other dimensions. EQ-5D-Y-3L consistently showed higher ceiling effects than the EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D- 5L across all dimensions. highest inconsistencies were showed in the P/D and A/D dimensions, indicating challenges in cross-walking across severity levels. In the testing of known groups’ validity, all versions of EQ-5D (Y-3L, Y-5L, 5L) were able to differentiate between children with and without health conditions and within rheumatic heart disease and acute limb fracture groups according to NYHA class and type of assistive device (p<0.001). EQ-5D-Y-5L demonstrated higher discriminative power than the EQ-5D-Y-3L, with ΔH′ values ranging from 0.28 (Mob) to 0.36 (P/D) and Evenness values (J′) were generally similar across instruments. Healthy children and those with T1DM generally showed high test-retest reliability (0.83 and 0.96) and the LSS demonstrated excellent reliability across all versions (0.85–0.89). In patients reporting improvement on the GRS (n=86), significant reductions in LSS were observed across all measures, with large effect sizes (SRM = -1.48 for Y-3L, -1.88 for Y-5L, and -1.69 for 5L). Among the worsened group (n = 19), all three instruments captured significant increases in LSS with moderate-to-large effect sizes (SRM = 0.70–0.79). When asked about their preferences for the two Y versions, 53% said they preferred EQ-5D-Y-3L, while 46% preferred EQ-5D-Y-5L.Conclusion:This is the first study to explore the psychometric properties of the Tigrinya versions of the Y-3L and Y-5L in acute and chronic patient populations in an Ethiopian setting. These are also the first generic preference-weighted measures available for use in younger populations in this setting. Both versions of EQ-5D-Y showed generally satisfactory psychometric properties in this study suggesting they are suitable for use in this context, though further research in other patient populations would be warranted.
