A DCE-only valuation protocol has the potential to eliminate the need for an interviewer. This would create the possibility of conducting EQ-5D-5L valuation studies in many countries and situations within which the EQ-VT protocol might be beyond reach. In this pilot study a DCE with duration (DCEd) EQ-5D-5L valuation protocol was implemented in Trinidad and Tobago with no interviewer. The results were compared with those from an EQ-VT study that was conducted in the same country weeks before. This allowed a comparison of results using DCEd and EQ-VT. This created the opportunity to update the population norms for Trinidad and Tobago. This study also addressed the question of identifying the anchoring approach in DCEd that is most consistent with cTTO. I.e. choices between immediate death and different health states lasting for the same duration versus choices between different health states with different durations of life. A representative sample of Trinidad and Tobago citizens completed EQ-VT valuation interviews. This was followed by another representative sample that completed a DCEd valuation study and a third representative sample that completed a population norms survey. For the EQ-VT study, the cTTO data were analyzed using a Tobit model that corrected for heteroskedasticity. DCE data were analyzed using a mixed logit model. The cTTO and DCE data were combined in hybrid model that provided the value set. The DCEd data were analyzed using mixed logit models with an exponential discount rate. The anchoring question was investigated using mixed logit models, both with and without exponential discounting for time preferences. The models were anchored via full health and immediate death tasks. EQ-VT and DCEd valuations produced similar results when correcting DCEd for nonlinear time preferences. The ordering of importance of the dimensions and scale were identical, suggesting that the two methods measure the same construct and produce similar results. With regard to the anchoring question, the non-linear time preferences anchored on duration provided the closest match to the benchmark EQ-VT cTTO values in this study. This suggests that DCE with duration can provide similar values to cTTO provided that nonlinear time preferences are accounted for, and anchoring is based on duration. The EQ-VT valuation study produced a value set that was similar to the Trinidad and Tobago-crosswalk set had been in use prior to this study. There were some changes in the relative importance of the five dimensions that may be associated with societal changes since the EQ-5D-3L study. The population norms study showed a general decline in health outcomes of the Trinidad and Tobago population over the period from 2012 to 2022/23. This project has produced encouraging results for DCEd as an elicitation approach in EQ-5D-5L valuation studies once non-linear time preferences are accounted for and anchoring is based on duration. This project also provided Trinidad and Tobago with an EQ-5D-5L value set and updated population norms.
