Objective The utility values elicited with composite time trade-off method (cTTO) for health states worse-than-dead (WTD) correlate poorly with other measures of state severity. Various explanations for this lack of sensitivity have been put forward in the literature. We aimed to explore if various modifications of cTTO influence the correlation between utility and severity to better understand the reasons for the lack of sensitivity and identify possible methods for improvement. Methods A total of 480 respondents completed an online TTO interview, valuing 12 EQ-5D-5L health states. The respondents were randomly split into four arms, A--D. Arm A served as the benchmark and followed the cTTO implementation for EQ-5D valuation studies. Notably, cTTO has three characteristics. First, it uses two choice tasks to identify whether a given health state is WTD (henceforth, sorting questions): 1) a comparison of living for 10 years in this state with immediate death; 2) an analogous comparison with 10 years in full health added to both alternatives. Second, the lead-time TTO (LT-TTO) part of cTTO used for WTD states censors the utility values at -1. Third, the first negative utility value offered in LT-TTO amounts to -0.5. In arm B, we removed the first sorting question. In arm C, we allowed for utility values <-1 by reducing the time in the valued state in the choice task. In arm D, we randomized the starting negative utility between -0.2, -0.4, -0.6, and -0.8. We compared the distributions of elicited utilities, inspected the association between utilities and level sum score (LSS) using linear regression, and assessed the proportion of inconsistencies between logically ordered states at the individual respondent level. We assessed the impact of selected personal characteristics, including religiosity and numeracy skills. Results Arm A replicated the lack of a statistically significant association between LSS and negative utility. In arm B, a statistically significant negative association emerged (slope =-0.018), while it remained absent in arms C and D. In arm A, the negative association seemed to emerge for respondents with above-average numeracy skills or those non-religious, yet remained non-significant (however, p-values <0.1). Arm B resulted in greater proportion of states being WTD than arm A (46.5% vs 26.3%) and slightly fewer inconsistencies (3.7% vs 5.7% for better-than-dead states, and non-significant 10% vs 12.1% for WTD states). Arm B also yielded a slightly lower utility for the 55555 health state than arm A in the estimated value set: -0.588 vs -0.479. Conclusion The observed lack of correlation between LSS and utility for WTD states appears linked to the sorting question using the immediate death comparison. LT-TTO is capable of eliciting utility values in a way that is sensitive to severity. However, when only very severe states are considered WTD and subject to LT-TTO, this sensitivity is compromised. Dropping the first sorting question in cTTO could be considered.
