This cross-sectional and longitudinal study investigates the Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) in children and adolescents with Cerebral Palsy (CP) and the consequential spillover effects on their caregivers in Argentina. Utilizing two EuroQol instruments,  the EQ-5D-Y-5L for children and the EQ-HWB-9 for caregivers, the research aims to explore both direct impacts and indirect influences on caregiver well-being due to prolonged caregiving roles. Set in the largest high-complexity pediatric environment of the Hospital of Pediatría Dr. J.P. Garrahan in Buenos Aires, Argentina, this study will analyze caregiver-child dyads to describe their HRQoL, as well as assess dynamic changes in HRQoL and spillover effect over time. The primary objectives include detailing HRQoL profiles, examining the nuanced relationship between child HRQoL and caregiver HRQoL, and evaluating the psychometric properties of EQ-5D-Y And EQ-HWB-9, including responsiveness. We plan to include 100-150 dyads, and have six month follow-up data of 50-75. By describing initial and six months follow up HRQoL, the study will provide a robust understanding of how children's health status impacts their caregivers' quality of life, incorporating factors like emotional, physical, and social well-being. In addition to descriptive and exploratory analyses of HRQoL profiles, the study will investigate differences in child HRQoL as related to CP severity and identify the most affected HRQoL domains among caregivers. Longitudinally, it will explore how changes in children’s health status influence caregiver HRQoL, aiming to validate the responsiveness of the EQ-HWB-9 in detecting shifts in caregiver burden over time. Furthermore, the research will utilize a comprehensive approach to correlate the EQ-HWB-9 findings with other caregiver-specific tools, such as the CarerQoL-7D, to assess their comparative effectiveness. By contributing to the validation of these instruments in a complex caregiver population, the study aims to illuminate the broader impacts of pediatric chronic illness on families, and contribute to the scarce body of evidence of EuroQol instruments in this population, thereby informing both internal EuroQol strategy as well as broader policy and supporting intervention strategies to assess spillover and mitigate caregiver burden.
