Background The EQ-5D-Y is a generic preference-weighted measure for children and adolescents which was developed within Europe. Two versions exist, the EQ-5D-Y-3L (Y-3L) and EQ-5D-Y-5L (Y-5L). This study aimed to cross-culturally adapt the Y-3L and Y-5L for use in Singapore and to assess the content validity, specifically, the relevance and comprehensiveness of the EQ-5D-Y descriptive system (EQ-5D-Y DS) in Asia. Methods To culturally adapt the instruments, an expert panel consisting of paediatricians and primary school educators were consulted. Modifications suggested by the expert panel were tested via cognitive debriefing interviews with children aged 8-12 in Singapore. To assess the content validity of the EQ-5D-Y DS, interviews were conducted with both healthy (n=8) and ill children (n=6) aged 8-15. In the interviews, children discussed their experience with poor health and commented on the comprehensiveness and relevance of the EQ-5D-Y DS. Results The cross-cultural adaptation process led to minor modifications to the UK English Y-3L and Y-5L versions, including using phrases familiar to the local children and adding examples to facilitate understanding. The five health dimensions in the EQ-5D-Y DS were spontaneously elicited when children discussed their experience with poor health. All health dimensions related to poor health elicited from the interviews fell into three broad categories: physical health (e.g. Appetite, Mobility, and Sleep), mental well-being (e.g. Annoyed/Frustrated and Scared/Worried), and social relationships (e.g. Family and Friends). The EQ-5D-Y DS was generally found to be relevant and comprehensive, although some health dimensions that may be relevant to the local population (Social relationship and Appetite) were not covered. Conclusions The UK English EQ-5D-Y instruments were adapted to produce the Singapore English EQ-5D-Y instrument that were comprehensible to local children as young as 8 years old. The EQ-5D-Y DS was generally relevant and comprehensive to measure poor health of local children. Future studies should ascertain the benefits of adding bolt-on items related to social relationships and appetite to the EQ-5D-Y DS.
