Background:The experimental EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox comprises two subsets of items: a Best Available Version, which includes eight items recommended for current applied use, and an Exploratory Version, which contains additional items to support development and testing. This study will evaluate selected items from both subsets to provide a comprehensive assessment of the performance of bolt-ons across key health-related quality of life (HRQoL) domains. The proposal focuses on: 1) hearing  and 2) vision bolt-ons, addressing sensory functioning; and 3) bolt-ons capturing respiratory functioning (breathing and fatigue). Objectives:To translate the experimental EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox hearing, vision, breathing and fatigue bolt-ons to Spanish (Argentina) and to explore their content validity among people with relevant target conditions such as hearing conditions, vision impairment, and respiratory problems (for breathing and fatigue) in Argentina. The study will assess item comprehension, relevance, and comprehensiveness, providing essential evidence to inform the final wording of these bolt-on(s).Methods:In the first stage, the selected bolt-on items (HEARING 1–5, VISION 1–4, BREATHING 1–2 and FATIGUE 1–10) will be translated into Spanish (Argentina) following EuroQol VMC translation guidelines, which include two forward translations, two back translations, and 10 cognitive debriefing interviews. Subsequently, a qualitative study will assess the content validity of the selected bolt-ons from the “best available” and “exploratory” Toolbox.  The qualitative study will include adults aged 18 years and older with health conditions related to the selected bolt-ons. Across all groups, purposive sampling will be used to ensure diversity in gender, education level and disease severity, with severity assessed using condition-specific clinical or patient-reported scales for each condition.For the hearing bolt-ons, the sample will comprise 30 participants: 15 individuals with moderate to severe tinnitus and 15 with hearing loss associated with chronic conditions such as diabetes, hypertension, or autoimmune diseases. All participants will have a confirmed diagnosis. For the vision bolt-ons, 30 participants will be recruited: 15 with age-related macular degeneration (both dry and wet forms) and 15 with diabetes-related visual complications, primarily diabetic retinopathy or diabetic macular edema. Participants will have had a confirmed diagnosis for at least six months. For the respiratory bolt-ons, the sample will include 30 participants: 15 with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and 15 with pulmonary fibrosis, all with a confirmed diagnosis of at least six months’ duration.Cognitive interviews will follow EuroQol guidelines for content validity testing. The paper-based, self-completed version will be used for the EQ-5D-5L+ bolt-ons. For participants with visual impairment who are unable to complete the questionnaire independently, a paper-based interviewer-administered (IA) version will be used. Data will be analyzed thematically to identify patterns in comprehension, relevance, and comprehensiveness of the items.Significance:Testing the selected bolt-ons in Spanish (Argentina), one of the most widely spoken languages globally, is a strategic priority of the EuroQol Group. The project also has the potential to enhance the applicability of the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) contexts. The results will provide the first evidence of linguistic and conceptual equivalence of Hearing, Visual, Breathing and Fatigue items in Latin America and inform future psychometric and valuation studies.
