The EuroQol Group is in the process of developing a valuation protocol for the EQ-5D-Y-5L. This will be informed by the current valuation protocol for the EQ-5D-Y, and other ongoing work exploring EQ-5D-Y-5L valuation such as the QUOKKA research program in Australia. Recent qualitative and quantitative evidence from QUOKKA suggests that adults and adolescents (aged 12-17) can value EQ-5D-Y-5L using DCE with duration approaches assuming preference linearity. QUOKKA has also embarked on a DCE study valuing the EQ-5D-Y-5L allowing for nonlinear time preferences. However, this is with adult respondents only, and adult respondents may value health states differently than adolescents.  Therefore the primary aim of this proposal is to leverage and extend the ongoing nonlinear DCE collection to include adolescent samples. This will allow us to explore the feasibility of the approach in younger respondents and compare the characteristics of the value sets assuming nonlinear time preferences between adults and adolescents. This study will provide the first test of nonlinear DCE methods in adolescent samples. It will tie together two strands of important missing evidence in the generation of the EQ-5D-Y-5L protocol, given interest in both using nonlinear DCE approaches in standalone DCE valuation protocols, and incorporating adolescent preferences into value sets. There will be two arms of data collection. In one arm, respondents will be asked to imagine themselves. In another arm, respondents will be asked to imagine a 10-year-old when completing valuation tasks. Respondents will complete DCE valuation tasks with full health and models allowing discounting of time will be used to analyse data. Value sets from the adolescent sample will them be compared to value sets completed by an adult sample. As described earlier, the adult sample has already been funded and data collection is underway. This study will inform several strategic objectives of EuroQol related to strengthening methods/protocols used to produce value sets and to inform methods used to value the EQ-5D-Y-5L. This includes information about the impact of perspective and sample type. As well as whether understanding whether it is feasible to use nonlinear modelling methods in paediatric EQ-5D instrument valuation. Ultimately, this will inform the development of the EQ-5D-Y-5L valuation protocol.
