Background: India lacks an EQ-5D-Y value-set to assess health-related quality of life (HRQoL) among children and adolescents, despite recommendations in national economic evaluations to use EQ-5D tools. This gap has significant implications for HTA studies focusing on pediatric interventions and can compromise the accuracy of quality adjusted life years (QALY) estimates in HTA studies concerning children. To address this gap, the Indian Health Technology Assessment agency (HTAIn) approved funding for a nationwide study to develop an EQ-5D-Y-5L value-set, which will be commenced soon. While the EQ-5D-Y-5L instrument, launched in September 2024, has superior psychometric properties compared to the older EQ-5D-Y-3L, no valuation protocol exists for EQ-5D-Y-5L. Therefore, first, a pilot study is being conducted currently, with an aim to assess the potential valuation methods, including the expanded Ramos-Goñi protocol and Discrete Choice Experiments (DCE) with a duration attribute. The design finalized by the EuroQol Foundation using the findings of this pilot study will subsequently be used in developing the Indian EQ-5D-Y-5L value-set. Developing an EQ-5D-Y-5L value set for India will allow for the estimation of child-specific health utility scores grounded in the values and preferences of the Indian population. This is vital for producing accurate assessments of health-related quality of life in economic evaluations of pediatric healthcare interventions. Embedding culturally appropriate perspectives into these evaluations will enhance the integrity of policy decisions, promoting fairness and relevance in child health policies. Methods: This study will employ a cross-sectional design involving face-to-face, computer-assisted interviews with a representative sample of 2,600 adults from six Indian states, selected using a multi-stage, stratified sampling approach to capture economic, health, and geographical diversity. The valuation protocol to be used—either the expanded Ramos-Goñi protocol or discrete choice experiment (DCE) with duration—will be finalized based on the findings of an ongoing pilot funded by the EuroQol Research Foundation. Valuation interviews will be conducted using EQ-5D-Y-5L translated into five Indian languages (Hindi, Gujarati, Tamil, Odia, and Assamese, as well as in English). Translation support in this regard is requested from the EuroQol Foundation. Depending on the final protocol, which is to be decided after completion of the ongoing pilot, data will be collected using either DCE with duration or the EQ-VT platform incorporating composite time trade-off (cTTO) and latent scale DCE methods. Data quality will be assured through interviewer training, standardized quality control procedures, and exclusion of invalid responses. The data will be analyzed using mixed logit models and Tobit regression as appropriate, with anchoring of latent values on the QALY scale, enabling derivation of an Indian EQ-5D-Y-5L value set based on societal preferences.
