The overall aim of this study was to provide empirical evidence regarding the measurement equivalence of data collected with various data collection modes (paper, handheld, tablet,interactive voice response [IVR], and web) for the EQ-5D-5L. The objectives of this research were to:1.Collect and analyze test-retest data of the paper version of the EQ-5D-5L; and2.Quantitatively assess (via crossover studies) the measurement equivalence of various modes of data collection (i.e., paper, handheld, tablet, IVR, and web) of the EQ-5D-5L.The testing associated with these objectives involved a series of quantitative assessments of the various modes of the EQ-5D-5L. Several study samples were recruited from the UK general population to meet the objectives and conduct the quantitative assessments. The first group of participants consisted of 240 UK subjects divided across four independent samples (i.e., 60 subjects per sample). These four samples were used to assess the test-retest reliability of the paper EQ-5D-5L, as well as to test the agreement in the scores produced by the paper measureversus the three screen-based implementations of the EQ-5D-5L (i.e., handheld, tablet, and web). The second group of participants consisted of 61 UK subjects recruited to test the agreement in the scores produced by the paper, web, and IVR versions. Test-retest analysis of the paper EQ-5D-5L and analyses of the agreement of the scores of the original paper mode and the electronic modes (i.e., handheld, tablet, web, IVR) were conducted. Specifically, a two-period, repeated measures design was used for assessing the test-retest reliability of the paper form in one sample of 60 subjects. A three-period repeated measures design, with subjects equally allocated to order of completion, was used for testing the agreement among the various modes (i.e., handheld, tablet, web, IVR) in the separate samples of subjects. Statistical analysis consisted of testing mean differences based on a dependent sample t-test for the test-retest analysis, and repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the three period contrasts. Estimation of agreement was based on the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). Analysis of the test-retest data resulted in mean differences near zero and ICC values above 0.90 for both the index and the global health rating scale (i.e., EQ VAS) scores. These data were also used to set the threshold values for the three period crossover assessments. For the mean differences, one-half of the standard deviations of 0.080 for the index and 8.0 for the EQ VAS was computed. Hence the equivalence intervals for mean differences were set as -0.040 to 0.040 for the index and -4.0 to 4.0 for the EQ VAS. The thresholds for denoting equivalence on the ICC for the three period comparisons were ICC lower 95% confidence interval (CI) ≥0.911 for the index and ≥0.940 for the EQ VAS.For the three period crossover designs, all of the mean differences for the index and EQ VAS were wholly contained in the equivalence intervals. Further, the ICC 95% lower CIs for the index and EQ VAS scores showed values above the thresholds for denoting equivalence across all comparisons in each sample. No significant mode-by-order interactions were present in any ANOVA model. These data, taken collectively, provide strong evidence that the data produced by the paper and electronic versions of the EQ-5D-5L are highly correlated and produce negligible differences in mean scores at the group level.
