Introduction  Value-Based Health Care (VBHC) principles are increasingly being adopted worldwide to improve healthcare quality. The Franciscus Gasthuis & Vlietland operationalizes the concept of value through the Quality Cost Indicator (QCI) framework. Central to QCI is Textbook Outcome (TO). TO is achieved when all predefined health outcome indicators are passed (score = 1) and is considered failed (score = 0) when at least one indicator is not passed. Next, Value in QCI is calculated as the percentage of patients achieving TO divided by the average healthcare costs. Using TO, a binary metric, may lead to over- or underestimation of value. This study aims to explore a graded optimal outcome approach using EQ-metrics, or estimations of EQ-metrics, using disease-specific outcomes to provide a more nuanced assessment of value.  Methods   Three patient populations were included: bariatric care, breast cancer care, and chronic kidney failure (later excluded due to low patient participation rates). Generic patient-reported outcomes (PROs) were assessed using EQ-5D-5L, disease-specific PROs via the already implemented ObesiQ (bariatric care) and EORTC-QLQ-BR23 (breast cancer). Hospital based healthcare costs and clinical outcome data were also collected from the electronic medical record. Improvements in PROs were analyzed with the Wilcoxon signed-rank (EQ-5D-5L, ObesiQ) and Bhapkar test (EORTC-QLQ-BR23). Univariate and multivariable regression analyses were used to explore associations between disease-specific outcome indicators, patient characteristics, and generic EQ metrics (tariffs, VAS, LSS). Cut-off values for graded optimal outcome, percentage TO, and QCI values were estimated. In depth interviews with healthcare professionals and managers were held to assess the role of EQ-5D-5L in VBHC at the micro and meso levels.  Results  Breast cancer population (n=33) No significant improvement in EQ metrics was observed. Patients reported significantly more arm (p = .03) and breast symptoms (p .01) post-surgery (EORTC-QLQ-BR23). Additionally, 79% of patients achieved TO based on clinical outcomes alone. Bariatric population (n=75) Significant improvements were observed in all EQ summary metrics (p .01) and ObesiQ domains (p .01). Furthermore, 68% achieved TO excluding comorbidities (64% including comorbidities).  Breast cancer population Body Image domain had the largest explanatory power on EQ metrics (R².24-.44), pre-surgery. Post-surgery, the Future Perspective domain had the largest explanatory power (R².12 -.21). Multivariable analysis indicated that disease-specific outcomes explained more variance of EQ-VAS (max R² = .49) than the EQ-tariff (max R² = .37) or unweighted sum scores (LSS, max R² = .37) at any time point. Bariatric population Pre-surgery, the Physical Functioning domain score had the largest explanatory power on EQ metrics (R².06- .31). Post-surgery, the Psychological Functioning domain score showed the largest R² (R².06- .11). Multivariable analysis indicated that disease-specific outcomes explained more variance of EQ-tariff (max R2 = .53) than EQ-VAS (max R2 = .37) at any time point. Post surgery, cut-off values for graded optimal outcomes based on EQ-VAS scores (p50) were 80 (breast cancer) and 82 (bariatric care); and 88 (breast cancer) and 92 (bariatric care) using EQ-tariffs (both scaled to a 0-100 scale). QCI cut-off values using optimal and graded optimal outcome (p50) ranged from 4.15 to 6.76 (breast cancer population) and 6.52 to 7.57 (bariatric population).  Discussion  EQ-5D-5L metrics provide information which can only be partially explained by the QCI-indicator set or any disease specific PROM. At the micro (patient physician) level, the EQ-5D-5L gives additional insights into the patient perceived health status. However, due to time constraints physicians prefer to limit consultations to disease specific PROMs and clinical outcomes. At the meso level, the EQ-5D-5L offers insights across patient populations, care paths and IPUs, but currently does not directly inform management decisions. The QCI model appears to be predominantly physician-oriented, with indicator selection being largely based on clinical relevance rather than patient-perceived value. To align the QCI model more closely with the principles of VBHC, a re-evaluation of the included indicators is needed, emphasizing outcomes that reflect what matters most to patients.
