Juvenile IdiopathicArthritis (JIA) is an autoimmune, chronic rheumatic disorder with episodic flare ups and remissions. Itoccurs in children 16 years and younger, causing short orlong-term disability (5). Impairments resulting from the inflammatory processes and leading to disability include on-going pain, limited range of motion, joint stiffness and decreased physical fitness. Other manifestations may include behavioural problems, social isolation, depression and anger(6). Skeletal growth may be delayed or distorted in severe cases of JIA, as growth hormone (GH) levels are low and premature fusion of the epiphyses at the hipmay occur (7). There is little consensus regarding the precise prevalence of JIAworldwide due to a lack of standard diagnostic criteria(8). The prevalence rate in developed countries varies in different population studies from seven to 400 per 100 000 children(9), (10), (11), (12). There are no accurate prevalence studies for South Africa (8), it would howeverappearthat there is a higherprevalence in North America and Europe compared to Asia and Africa(11).Limited researchon African or South African populations with JIAis thought to be due to limited resources being directed at the high burden of infectious diseases such as Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)and Tuberculosis (TB)in these regions, rather than to JIA(8). The cause of the disease is thought to beasthe result of an interaction of genes.In 2004, a study was performed in South Africa which investigated the association of the HLA-DRB1 allele with rheumatoid arthritis. The study showed a strong relationship between erosive rheumatoid arthritis and the presence of such alleles, withconsistencyacross race groups –similar to a studyin Europe, North America and Asia(13). The pathophysiology of JIAincludes the presence of autoantibodies or autoreactive T cells (14), which attack the body, causing the joint synoviumto swell and produce excess fluid, resulting in the breakdown of cartilage and friction at the joint site with movement-leading to stiffness, pain and swelling. No cure exists, however first line treatment includes NSAID’s, as well as corticosteroid injections, physical therapy and disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARD’s). DMARD’s are a group of disease modifying drugs which aim to slow down the progression of the disease(15).The psychometric properties of the diseasespecificPedsQLRheumatology Modulehavebeen compared with other disease specific outcome measures, such asthe Juvenile Arthritis Quality of LifeQuestionnaire (JAQQ), the Paediatric Rheumatology Quality of Life Scale (PRQL), and the Childhood Arthritis Health Profile (CAHP), but not with a generic outcome measure(16). A study conducted bySawyer et al. 2003in Southern Australia investigated the relationship between HRQoL, physical functioningand pain in children with JIA, using the PedsQL Rheumatology Module Arthritis module. The study indicated that the children experienced themost problems with physical functioningand theleast problems in social functioning. The children with higher levels of pain, reported lower levels of functioning in the physicaland emotional dimensions(17).The Juvenile Arthritis Multidimensional Assessment Report(JAMAR) has beenused in clinical practice to improve the care of children with JIA(18)(19)(1). The performance of the JAMAR was favourably compared to the PedsQL Rheumatology Module (1). The EQ-5D-Y has been used to assess HRQoL in children with a variety of health conditions, including JIA(20)(21)(22)(23)but its performance has not been compared to disease specific outcomes. There are at least three outpatient clinics in Cape Town which are dedicated to the management of children with JIA, one of which is at alarge Paediatric Hospital and the other two are based in General Hospitals. In total, there were 219childrenfrom 8-15 years,registeredatthese clinics in 2017, however not all these children attend the outpatient clinics regularly. Many of these children default clinics during a period of remission and only reappear if they relapse. Children typically attend these outpatient facilities with their parentsmonthly if they have been started on DMARDs and every 4 months thereafter if they are on DMARDs and biannually or annually if they are stable off DMARDs. The JAMARis the only outcome measure that is currently used to monitor functional and HRQoL change in the children. However, it is a lengthy instrument and not routinely applied. As the joint damage and symptoms affect HRQoL and can persistinto adulthood in 50% of children (24), it is important to trackHRQoL. The generic EQ-5D-Ymight be appropriate for this use as it can used until the age of 18 years and, while not interchangeable with the adult EQ-5D, it at least articulates with this version which could be used in adulthood.It was hypothesised that the EQ-5D-Y, whereas not yielding the details of the child’s condition to the extent of the JAMAR, would show concurrent validity with the JAMAR. It could thus be used not only to track changes in the child’s HRQoL overtime but also as a screening for increased inflammatory activity. The JAMAR might then be applied in the cases who reported disease flare or a decrease in their HRQoL.
