Objective: It is assumed that the 'Q' in Quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) is unidimensional. However, this assumption has not been sufficiently tested which is what the current study aims to do. It is important to note that the response task might influence the dimensionality of the data. The current study should be considered a pilot study using a novel methodology to test the dimensionality of rank-ordered health states.Methods:The rank data of 2997 respondents from the Measurement and Valuation of Health (MVH) study was exploded into paired comparison data. Pairwise choice probabilities were transformed into proximity data by |,5.0ijijPwhere ijis the dissimilarity between health states iand jand ijPisthe probability of health state ibeing preferred to health state j. The proximity data were entered into a similarity matrix. Subsequently, this matrix scaled with metric and non-metric multidimensional PROXSCAL algorithms in SPSS in 1, 2, and 3 dimensions. Dimensional fit was assessed usinginterpretability,stress measures,and scree plots.Results:Based on interpretability the unidimensional solution had the best fit. State '33333' was scaled at the end of the continuum while all the states with a single attribute level at level 2 were scaled at the other end of the continuum. In terms of stress and the scree plot a two-dimensional solution would indicate a meaningful improvement over the unidimensional solution. However, the interpretability was lower compared to the unidimensional solutions. The three-dimensional solutions did not decrease stress measures meaningfully, nor increase the interpretability. Discussion: Based on the current findings we can infer that EQ-5D-3L rank-based data is scaled best unidimensionally, even though statistical fit leaves room for improvement. Other types of data could be put through the protocol of the current study to test the assumption of unidimensionality as well. The time trade-off data would seem like a prima candidate for this type of follow-up research.
