Objectives Our project had two main objectives, i.e. to estimate the prevalence of post COVID at the long term and study its association with HRQoL, and to study the psychometrics of the EQ-5D-5L for its use in post COVID. Methods Data of the CORona Follow-Up study (CORFU) were used, with an additional follow-up questionnaire at 3 years after COVID-19 designed specifically for the present project (‘long CORFU’). Data were available of former COVID-19 patients with and without post COVID. HRQoL was quantified using the EQ-5D-5L. The EQ index was computed using the Dutch value set. To estimate the prevalence of post COVID over 3 years of follow-up and associations between post COVID and HRQoL, we used (generalized) linear mixed-effects regression. Multivariable linear regression was used to estimate differences between those with and without post COVID in change of HRQoL between 2 and 3 years, and to assess the association between baseline and diversity factors and change in HRQoL in only those with post COVID. For the objective on psychometrics of the EQ-5D-5L, we used longitudinal data to determine responsiveness, and for distributional characteristics the ceiling/ floor effects we used health profiles. Divergent and convergent validity were assessed using Spearman’s correlation, and we used multivariable regression to determine explanatory power. Known-group validity was assessed by testing differences in mean EQ-5D-5L aggregate scores between groups of different symptom severity, and responsiveness by estimating correlation coefficients. Results We used data of 1255 questionnaires to determine the prevalence of post COVID at 1, 2, and 3 years follow up (62.5, 63.6, and 64.9%), with no significant change over time. Post COVID was significantly associated with HRQoL: mean utility was 0.16 (95% confidence interval (CI): 0.13, 0.18), p-value: 0.001) lower, adjusted for confounders. At two years after COVID-19, 66% met the definition of post COVID. The effect of having post COVID on change in VAS scores between 2 and 3 years was 1.6 points (95% CI -2.6, 5.8; P=0.4) and on change in utility -0.03 points (95% CI -0.07,0.02; P=0.3). Having social engagement problems was associated with greater positive changes in EQ VAS scores. For the psychometric properties, we observed a ceiling effect in 7.2%; no floor effect was detected. A total of 115 health profiles (3.7% of possible profiles) were observed. Significant correlation coefficients across EQ-5D-5L dimensions ranged from poor (0.24, for anxiety/depression and self-care) to moderately strong (0.62, for mobility and usual activities). A moderately strong correlation (-0.67; 95%CI -0.74, -0.59) was found between the EQ-5D-5L level sum score and EQ VAS. Usual activities and mobility together explained 39.0% of EQ VAS variance. Other dimensions did not significantly improve contribution. Mean (SD) EQ-5D-5L level sum score for the group with low, medium and high severity of symptoms was 8.1 (2.4), 9.3(2.9), and 12.3 (3.2), respectively. A poor correlation was found between change of level sum score and change of general health status, and between changes in general health and changes in usual activities, pain discomfort, and anxiety/depression. Conclusions From this project, we can conclude that the prevalence of post COVID did not change over time and that presence of post COVID significantly affected HRQoL. HRQoL remained stable for those with post COVID between 2 and 3 years, and improved only for those without post COVID. Any variation in changes within patients could not be attributed to sociodemographic or clinical characteristics. More studies may be needed to understand the variability in HRQoL changes in post COVID patients. We found promising psychometric properties of the EQ-5D-5L in post COVID, demonstrating sensitivity in distinguishing variations in health states and symptom severity. The dominance of mobility and usual activities in explaining general health suggests that the EQ-5D-5L may under-represent other health aspects important to post COVID, highlighting a potential value of bolt-ons.
