By re-analysing data initially collected to generate the EQ-5D value set in Britain, we aimed to identify the effect of health-related experience on the preference for health states. Aligned with a recent framework that classified experience as either personal (past, present, and future) or vicarious (affective and non-affective), dummy variables were coded from a battery of experience-related questions directed at each respondent. In the first step, the association between all five measures and the valuation of EQ-5D states via time trade-off (TTO) methods was explored using a linear regression model applied to the original Measuring Value in Health (MVH) dataset containing 36,849 valuations. Control variables included a variety of demographic and socioeconomic variables. Furthermore, the causal effect of past or present personal experience and the affective vicarious experience was tested using a fixed effects model in a panel dataset that consisted of responses from a subgroup of the MVH respondents who participated in a Re-test approximately ten weeks after the first interview. This dataset contained 2,579 valuations from 214 individuals in each interview. Exploring the association of five experience measures in the original MVH dataset showed no stable, statistically significant association between the experience measures and the response variable. The analysis of the panel data using a fixed effects model did not result in statistically significant results either. However, present personal experience at the point of valuation led consistently to, on average, higher valuations of health profiles. The effect of vicarious and past personal experience was less clear. We could not quantify any causal effects of experiences with severe illnesses on the valuation of health states that were statistically significant on the 0.05 level. However, the general direction of the effects seemed to align with the theory, and it is likely that non-significant effects in our results were a result of the small sample size. Further research and better data is required.
