Stroke is the second leading cause of death globally and significantly impacts the health-related quality of life (HRQoL) of survivor. While there are some established longitudinal studies of stroke patients internationally, little is known about health-related quality of life (HRQoL) outcomes following the first-ever stroke in Ethiopia (classified as a low-income country), where the population exceeds 110 million people. Therefore, this study aimed: 1) to assess the feasibility of administering the EQ-5D-5L to patients and their proxy respondents during hospital admission and again 3 and 6 months following an acute onset illness (first-ever stroke); 2) to examine further the reliability and validity of the EQ-5D-5L applied to stroke patients and their proxy; 3) to examine patient-proxy agreement on the domains and summary scores of the EQ-5D-5L; and 4) to qualitatively investigate, within patient-proxy dyads, patient and proxy perspectives of the reasons for any differences in HRQoL reporting on the descriptive profile between patients and their proxies. At baseline, 200 patient-proxy dyads were recruited between November 2021 and November 2022, and in the second and third visits, 152 (76%) and 133 (66.5%) patient-proxy dyads were included. At baseline, hospital admitted patients with ischemic stroke (n=128; 64%), hemorrhagic stroke (n=66; 33%), and cardioembolic stroke (n=6; 3%) were recruited. The Amharic version of self-completed and interviewer-administered EQ-5D-5L were completed by the stroke patients and the proxy self-complete and interviewer administered versions were completed by their proxy respondents. At all three time points participants (both patients and proxies) preferred the interviewer-administered version of the tool. Demographic and clinical data were collected at baseline, and the degree of disability or dependence in the daily activities of stroke patients was measured using the Modified Rankin Scale (mRs) at baseline and follow up visits. A qualitative interview was done with 15 dyads to investigate potential explanations for the observed slight discrepancy in EQ-5D profiles between patients and proxies at three time points of an interview. The EQ-5D-5L response distribution demonstrated that higher proportion of patients and proxies reported problems on usual activities (UA) and mobility (MO) dimensions while fewer problems were reported on selfcare, anxiety/depression (A/D) and pain/discomfort (P/D) dimension regardless of the visit period. The proportion of reported no problems (level 1)/problems (level 2 to 5) for each dimension of EQ-5D-5L were compared across the interview period between patient and proxy using the chi-square test. No significant difference in reported no problems/problems proportion was observed across all dimensions. Weighted Cohen’s Kappa statistics were computed to compare the agreement between patient and proxy rating for each dimension of EQ-5D-5L at baseline and follow up visits. At baseline, a lower agreement was observed for P/D (0.32) and A/D (0.43) dimensions, while a higher agreement was observed for MO and selfcare (SC) dimensions. In all dimensions, an improved agreement was observed in visits two and three compared to the baseline report. Differences between patient and proxy utility scores (based on EQ-5D index and EQ VAS) were assessed with paired t-tests at baseline and follow up visits. No significant difference in mean EQ-5D index and EQ VAS was observed between patient and proxy at baseline and visit two; however, at the third visit a significant difference was observed in EQ-5D index or EQ-VAS score with t (131) = -0.88, p = .01 and t (126) = -2.68, p = .008 respectively. EQ-5D index reported by a patient at baseline shows a strong correlation (r=0.88) with the EQ-5D index reported by a caregiver at baseline; however, moderate correlation was observed with EQ VAS score (r=0.7 for patients and r=0.66 for caregiver). The EQ VAS and EQ-5D index showed a moderate to strong correlation with the mRs score. The mean utility based on the type of stroke was reported in which higher mean utility was observed in cardioembolic stroke than in ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke; however, the difference was not significant based on the type of stroke. A significant difference in mean utility was observed among clients with different levels of stroke disability based on the mRs score (good known group validity). Overall, there was no significant difference between the patient and proxy-reported EQ-5D-5L profiles or utility values at admission. There was strong agreement/correlation in reported values in admission and follow up visits.
