Abstract Introduction: Despite epilepsy affects health related quality of life significantly, there has been no study that assessed the content validity and measurement properties of the EQ-5D-3L and EQ-5D-5L in low-income settings, where the disease burden is highest. Therefore, the study aims to assess the content validity and measurement properties of the Amharic versions of the EQ-5D-3L and EQ-5D-5L among patients with epilepsy. Method: Mixed-method study was conducted from December 2025-May 2026 among 200 patients with epilepsy. The participants completed the EQ-5D-3L, EQ-5D-5L, EQ-VAS, and PHQ-9. Measurement properties were assessed in terms of feasibility, preferences, ceiling effects, redistribution and consistency, informativity, test-retest reliability, convergent and known groups’ validity. Test-retest reliability was assessed using ICC and Cohen’s weighted kappa coefficient. Convergent validity was assessed using the Spearman's rank correlation coefficients between EQ-5D index scores and the EQ-VAS scores, and known-groups validity was assessed using Mann-Whitney U/Kruskal-Wallis tests. Informativity was determined by calculating the Shannon index (H ′) and Shannon’s Evenness index (J ′). Content validity was explored using focus groups and in-depth interviews with health professionals and care-givers.  Thematic analysis was conducted for the qualitative data.Results: The EQ-5D-5L showed lower ceiling effects (24.0% vs. 29.5%) and higher absolute informativity with mean gain of 31.2% compared to EQ-5D-3L. Both versions index scores demonstrated strong convergent validity with EQ-VAS (3L: r= 0.706; 5L: r= 0.732). Both EQ-5D-5L and EQ-5D-3L indicated good known-groups validity with the EQ-5D-5L providing higher mean index score across the sub-groups. Both versions demonstrated acceptable test-retest reliability with slightly higher ICC for the EQ-5D-3L (3L ICC = 0.83; 5L ICC = 0.73). Feasibility was excellent with 100% completion rate for both the questionnaires and 93.5% of the participants preferred EQ-5D-5L. The qualitative findings confirmed that all EQ-5D dimensions as relevant. However, cognition, memory, fatigue, sleep, stigma and social relationship emerged as the most critical missing dimension requiring bolt-ons.Conclusion: Both EQ-5D-3L and EQ-5D-5L indicated good measurement properties and content validity. The EQ-5D-5L performed better in terms of ceiling, informativity and preferences and  the qualitative findings confirmed the relevance of all the existing EQ-5D dimensions. We recommend the use of EQ-5D-5L in HRQoL assessments and routine clinical practice in this setting. Further research on epilepsy-specific bolt-ons is needed to improve comprehensiveness and sensitivity.
