Background and objectiveThe psychometric performance interviewer-administered versions of EQ-5D-Y-3L (Y-3L) and EQ-5D-Y-5L (Y-5L) have been examined among paediatric patients in Hong Kong using preliminary traditional Chinese (Hong Kong) versions. However, the official traditional Chinese (Hong Kong) version of the interviewer-administered Y-3L and Y-5L are yet to be evaluated, and limited data exist on performance of the Y-3L and Y-5L in younger children. This study aims to address this gap by examining the psychometric properties of interviewer-administered Y-3L and Y-5L in children aged 6-10.Proposed methodsThis prospective cohort study will include a sample of at least 100 orthopaedic paediatric patients aged 6-10 recruited from Hong Kong clinics/hospitals. Children are considered eligible if they are (1) ethnic Chinese aged 6-10 years, (2) diagnosed with orthopaedic health problems, and (3) able to read and communicate in Chinese. After obtaining informed consent from parents/guardians, children will be administered by interviewers to complete the traditional Chinese (Hong Kong) versions of Y-3L and Y-5L questionnaires digitally. Feasibility will be assessed by the proportion of missing values in Y-3L and Y-5L responses. Distribution of response levels and ceiling effects will be also examined. The proportion of children reporting the best possible health state (11111) for Y-3L and Y-5L will be used to measure ceiling effects. The impact of additional response options in Y-5L will be measured by the absolute and relative reduction in ceiling effects from Y-3L to Y-5L. Discriminatory power for Y-3L and Y-5L will be measured using the Shannon index and Shannon Evenness index. Known-group validity will be investigated by comparing proportion of “no problem” responses by clinical groups. Test-retest reliability will be evaluated using Gwet’s agreement coefficient based on repeated assessments at two weeks from baseline among participants reporting no change in health status. Responsiveness will be assessed by the mean changes in EQ-5D-Y scores during the past 3 to 9 months in patients with “worsened,” “unchanged.” and “improved” will be tested using paired t test. The findings will address the knowledge gap regarding the feasibility, validity, discriminatory power, redistribution properties, reliability, and responsiveness of these instruments in this specific age group within a clinical context. Moreover, the data collected in this study will be contributed to the SAVED for pooling in future studies.
