Objective: The nine-dimension EQ Health and Wellbeing Short (EQ-HWB-S) has been valued using time trade-off and discrete choice experiments (DCE) using EQ Portable Valuation Technology (EQ-PVT). One novel approach to minimise attribute non-attendance is an adaptive DCE using the Potentially All Pairwise RanKings of all Possible Alternatives (PAPRIKA) method. PAPRIKA constrains the DCE’s pairwise choices to two dimensions at a time, presented adaptively to each participant. A separate binary search identifies the location of 'dead' resulting in personal and societal value sets. The aim was to test PAPRIKA’s feasibility for valuing the EQ-HWB-S. Method: Applying PAPRIKA to EQ-HWB-S would result in a DCE with up to 70 pairwise choices. To minimise burden, two DCEs were run based on splitting EQ-HWB-S’s dimensions into two groups of four with one common linking dimension, pain, which was selected for its salience and the expectation that it would have a similar relative importance in each DCE. A second binary search survey used the combined results from the DCEs. Participants completed one DCE and the binary search survey. After pilot-testing using “think-aloud” interviews, the surveys were administered to a representative UK general population sample. Data exclusion criteria included inconsistency in at least one repeated pairwise choice and speeding. The time taken for each DCE, the extent of inconsistency, the number of pairwise choices and participants’ feedback are assessed. Participants’ rankings and utility weights are compared to EQ-PVT results. Results: Of the 1230 DCE participants, 546 were included with 349/546 (64%) completing the binary search survey, resulting in 344 participants with utility weights. These participants tended to be older and more likely to be female or to report general health problems. The median time per trade-off tasks was 14 and 12 seconds for the two DCEs and the median time to complete the two DCE surveys for those who were included was 9 minutes 42 seconds and 8 minutes 56 seconds respectively. The median number of trade-offs was 22 (range 10-32) and 24 (range 11-35) respectively. The median time taken to complete the binary search survey was 3 minutes and 13 seconds. The majority of DCE participants (>70%) agreed that the DCEs were easy to understand and reflected their preferences in terms of dimension rankings, were confident in their answers and did not get bored or tired completing the survey. Pain was most commonly ranked as first and activity, mobility and sadness/depression were second, mirroring the EQ-PVT ranking. The worst state had a value of −0.51 compared to −0.384 for EQ-PVT. The mean difference between dimension weights from PAPRIKA and EQ-PVT was 0.005 but differences varied by dimension, e.g. PAPRIKA gave less weight to mobility and more to cognition. Levels 2 and 3 had small weights for PAPRIKA and EQ-PVT. Discussion and conclusion: PAPRIKA was successfully used to value EQ-HWB-S and is feasible based on participants’ feedback and results which are similar to EQ-PVT. Compared to EQ-PVT, PAPRIKA resulted in larger weights for some dimensions such as cognition which may reflect a reduction in attribute non-attendance. Like other PAPRIKA studies, a large proportion of participants were excluded to ensure data quality. Furthermore, participants saw only half of the dimensions in each DCE which assumes preferences are not affected by present/absent dimensions.
