EuroQol holds over 3000 EQ-5D versions, and this number is likely to increase as new instruments such as EQ-HWB, EQ-TIPS and the Toolbox become approved instruments. This makes for important challenges for instrument maintenance . For example, when a user identifies that an historic font issue has led to differences between two modes of administration in a language, this can involve opening, reviewing, and potentially updating many many documents to implement what is, seemingly, a minor update. Unsuprisingly, as part of the Version Management Reorganisation Planning, version maintenance was identified as a key issue in terms of workload, and also in terms of potential reputational risk (e.g. if updates are not able to be actioned promptly for users). To make the workload manageable and to future-proof our version management processes as new EuroQol instruments are developed, the VMC proposes the SIMPLE project to investigate streamlining our versions using a modular format to: 1) Reduce the translation complexity by simplifying and harmonising the core structure and wording of existing and future instruments, 2) Ensure consistency across MOAs and delivery platforms and, to some extent, across the Adult and Youth versions, and 3) Improve timeliness of responsiveness to external requests without compromising quality.  SIMPLE will use qualitative and quantitiative methods to explore new approaches for streamlining version management and translation processes to facilitate increased responsiveness for users whilst maintaining EuroQol’s high quality standards. SIMPLE involves four phases. Phases 1 & 2 are developmental background work and workskops with the VMC research team and key stakeholders exploring the optimal streamlined 'modules' and instructions; Phase 3 is qualitative (involving ECRs) testing the feasibility with lay respondents in four countries (and languages), and Phase 4 (again with ECRs) is quantitatively testing equivalence between the modular versions and our current modes of administration.  The SIMPLE team will provide interim reports to the Exec at the end of Phases 2 & 3 (providing opportunity for 'Proceed to the next Phase' or 'Stop at this phase' assessments) & a Final Report at the end of the project (i.e. after Phase 4).
