Introduction: Valuation studies using composite time trade-off (cTTO) interviews have historically been conducted face-to-face. The COVID-19 pandemic forced a number of valuation studies to conduct their interviews online via videoconference. These studies reported that online interviews appeared feasible and acceptable; however, participants were not randomly allocated and there was no reporting of cTTO value equivalence. This study builds on its sister study from the UK and aims to assess the acceptability and equivalence of in person face-to-face interviews with online videoconferencing interviews on cTTO valuation outcomes and explore the impact of interview mode on attendance and on data quality. Methods: Participants were recruited via an external market research company from Greater Melbourne and Regional Victoria. A multi-stage stratified sampling approach was used, with quotas based on Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) data for age, gender, geographical location, education level and income. Consenting participants were randomly allocated to complete a cTTO interview face-to-face or online with 1 of 4 trained interviewers. Participants who refused the interview after randomisation were contacted to offer reasons. Participants completed cTTO tasks for the same 10 EQ-5D-5L health states using EQ-VTv2 software. Mean and SD cTTO value overall and for each health state, participant understanding, data quality, demographic characteristics, participant preference, participant engagement and participant feedback were all compared across interview mode. Statistical equivalence for cTTO values for each state was tested using two one-sided t-tests by mode. Finally, regression analysis was completed to assess the impacts of interview mode on cTTO value while controlling for demographic characteristics of the participants. Results: Mean cTTO values were shown to be equivalent for mild health states and showed no significant difference for serious health states. Regressions analysis showed that mode of interview did not have any significant impact on mean cTTO values (p=.817). The proportion of individuals who did not accept their interview in the face-to face group (21.6%) was significantly larger than the proportion in the online group (1.8%) (p<0.0001). No between group difference in demographic characteristics was found. No significant difference was found between groups for participant engagement, understanding or feedback. No significant difference was found between groups for any indicators of data quality. Overall, 151 (37.4%) participants reported that they would have chosen to be interviewed online if given the choice, 51 (12.7%) would have preferred to be interviewed face-to-face and 201 (49.9%) did not mind. Discussion: The results from this study indicate that cTTO values obtained from face-to-face and online interviews are statistically significantly equivalent for mild health states. Regression analysis found no statistically significant association between health state value and mode when all the ten health states were combined. The data generated by both interview modes was of high quality and showed no significant difference. The majority of participants had no preference for interview mode however a larger proportion of participants preferred to be interviewed online rather than face-to-face, this preference was supported by the larger proportion of participants who did not accept their interview when randomised to face-to-face. Both online and face-to-face interviews appear to be equivalent and acceptable for conducting cTTO interviews.
