Objectives: EuroQol is currently developing a suite of new instruments, including the EQ-HWB-9. Little is known about the impact of single modifications (e.g. a one-word change in an item or a single response level) on quantitative psychometric performance of the instrument. This tests the effect of individual modifications on quantitative performance of EQ-HWB-9, applying a one-at-a-time approach.Methods: In 2025, an online cross-sectional survey was conducted in a representative general population sample in Hungary (n=2,000). The study used a mixed design with between- and within-subject components. Respondents were randomised into five arms examining differences in EQ-HWB-9 item wording, response levels and ordering, with balanced distribution across age, gender, education, place of residence, region and general health. Arm 1 used EQ-HWB-9 v1.2 (‘modified’, 2024) items and response levels. Arm 2 used modified items with v1.1 (‘experimental’, 2022) response levels. Arm 3 used experimental items with modified response levels. Arm 4 used modified items and response levels with reversed ordering of the activities and mobility items. Arm 5 used the modified items and response levels with a mobility item not referencing aids. Additional variants of the mobility, cognition and control items were administered across all arms. Psychometric properties were assessed across all arms, including distributional characteristics, convergent validity, agreement (Kendall’s tau) and known-groups validity (Cohen’s d effect size). Subgroup analysis was conducted by mobility aid use in the past 7 days (n=186).Results: Replacing ‘only occasionally’ with ‘a little of the time’ and ‘some difficulty’ with ‘moderate difficulty’ produced no significant differences in mean item scores for any item. The use of ‘and’ vs ‘or’ in the mobility item (‘getting around inside and/or outside’) or reversing the order of the mobility and activities items did not result in statistically significant differences in mean item scores or ceiling. Agreement between the with-aids and without-aids mobility items was lower among respondents who used mobility aids (0.448-0.731) than among those who did not (0.755-0.793). Known-groups validity for musculoskeletal diseases was similar between the with-aids and without-aids mobility items. Testing of the cognition item yielded inconclusive results, with one arm showing significantly more frequent problems with ‘trouble’ and the other with ‘difficulty’. Simplifying the parenthetical explanation of the control item led to more frequent experiences of problems. At the instrument level, EQ-HWB-9 showed very similar mean level sum scores across the 5 arms (range: 15.98-17.18; p=0.140). For known-groups validity, EQ-HWB-9 variants with either experimental items or response scales (arms 2 and 3) often yielded lower effect sizes than fully modified variants (arms 1, 4 and 5).Conclusion: For many individual wording, response option or item order modifications, only minor differences were observed in psychometric performance, suggesting that these refinements have a limited impact on instrument performance in the general population. These findings provide direct, quantitative evidence to guide finalisation of the EQ-HWB-9.
