Background: There is a growing interest in health technology assessment (HTA) in Morocco. An EQ-5D-5L value set allows the computation of Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) in economic evaluations of healthcare interventions to support decision making. Although context-specific HTA is needed, a value set for the EQ-5D-5L based on the preferences of the general Moroccan population is not yet available. Objective: The aim of this study was to develop a Moroccan value set for the EQ-5D-5L based on data from a representative sample of the Moroccan adult population. Methods: A nationally representative sample using quota stratified sampling based on gender, age category, and urban/rural residence was approached based on the last general population and housing census data in Morocco. Data were collected using the international valuation protocol developed by the EuroQol Group (EQ-VT) to elicit the health preferences using: (i) composite time trade-off (cTTO) and (ii) discrete choice experiment (DCE). The cTTO includes 86 EQ-5D-5L health states grouped into 10 blocks, each block with 10 health states. The DCE comprises 196 pairs EQ-5D-5L health states grouped into 28 blocks, each block with 7 choice pairs. Each respondent valued 1 block of health states using cTTO, and 1 block of DCE pairs. The cTTO and DCE data were modeled using a Tobit model and a conditional logit model, respectively. In addition, these models were combined using a hybrid model. Model performance was compared using AIC and BIC criteria. Results: A total of 1006 respondents were included in the study. Responses from 30 participants (3%) were flagged according to the 4 quality control criteria. The cTTO distribution was similar across interviewers and there were only minor interviewer effects. The most common health problem reported by participants was anxiety/depression (44.53%), and the least frequent health problem was self-care (15.71%). The mean ± standard deviation of the EQ VAS score was 77.25 ± 17.05. The hybrid model was considered the preferred model, i.e., the estimated coefficients attributed to the levels of severity were logically consistent. The pain/discomfort dimension had the largest effect on health state preference values, followed by anxiety/depression, mobility, self-care and usual activities. The hybrid model was in relative agreement with the cTTO and DCE models regarding the order of dimensions that affect the HRQOL. Conclusion: Morocco is the second country in the MENA region (following Egypt) with an EQ-5D-5L value set. This study supports the use of EQ-5D-5L data for healthcare decision-making in the Moroccan context. The availability of the EQ-5D-5L value set will facilitate health technology assessment in Morocco. Moreover, it will be used to implement patient-reported outcomes measures for routine clinical practice to improve the monitoring and management of patients and thus provide more evidence for decision-makers in healthcare systems in Morocco.
