Background: The advent of Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR) modulator therapy in Cystic Fibrosis (CF) has resulted in a need to motivate for access to life saving therapy with a reliance on measurement of Health Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) for health policy decision making. In regions where drugs are accessible HRQoL is key in monitoring real world outcomes. This study aims to assess the psychometric performance of the EQ-5D-Y-3L, EQ-5D-Y-5L, PedsQL and Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire Revised (CFQR) in children living with CF in South Africa. Methods: One-hundred and fifty eight children living with CF aged 0-18 were eligible for recruitment. Despite 103 caregivers and children providing consent/assent responses were received from 49 children aged 8-18 years and 90 caregivers of children aged 0-18 years. Children and/or their caregivers completed all four HRQoL measures, in random order, at routine medical visits and at a maximum of three subsequent medical visits. The psychometric performance of the measures was assessed regarding the known group validity, concurrent validity, test-retest reliability, responsiveness and patient-caregiver agreement. Results: The median age of the participants who self-completed the measures was 14 years with an even distribution of gender (Female, n=24). The majority of the sample was CFTR modulator naïve (n=45) and generally well with a median FEV1 of 79.2% . This was reflected in the similarly high report of no problems across the EQ-5D-Y-3L, EQ-5D-Y-5L and PedsQL. The CFQR self-report showed good discriminant validity for known groups according to chronic lung infection (U=183.0 p=0.025) and pulmonary exacerbations (U=105.0 p=0.025) whereas the self-report EQ VAS discriminated between severity of lung function (H=9.91, p=0.010). The total scores of all self-report measures were highly associated and there were moderate to high associations for all dimensions hypothesized to be associated. Repeat self-report measures on the EQ-5D-Y-3L, EQ-5D-Y-5L and PedsQL showed fair to moderate reliability in those with a stable health condition according to the CFQR score (n=38). The self-report EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L were both able to detect improvements in health with a large effect size. Whereas the self-report EQ VAS and PedsQL had a small to moderate effect size for detecting improved or worsened health. Children reported higher overall HRQoL than their caregivers on all measures. There is overall good agreement (ICC>0.70) between patient and caregiver on all measures considering their total scores. At a dimension level the EQ-5D-Y-5L and CFQR showed better agreement between the patient and caregiver than the EQ-5D-Y-3L and PedsQL. Conclusion: Despite good association between dimensions and total scores on the EQ-5D-Y-3L, EQ-5D-Y-5L, PedsQL and CFQR the CFQR was able to discriminate between known clinical groups. However, the PedsQL, EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L showed promising reliability and responsiveness results in children living with CF. Although there was good patient-caregiver agreement for the total scores of all measures the EQ-5D-Y-5L and CFQR showed better agreement at a dimension level. Further research with larger samples is warranted before a recommendation can be made on selection of a generic HRQoL measure to use alongside the disease-specific CFQR.
