I had the privilege to perform research at the department of population health sciences and orthopedic surgery in a world-renowned hospital (Mount Sinai Hospital, New York), with one of its focus being registry data analysis. The director dr. J. Poeran, an epidemiologist with Dutch origins, of whom Gouke Bonsel was his original PhD advisor, personally supervised this project. We primarily aimed to explore analytical techniques used to analyze health inequalities, specifically the concentration index and accompanying decomposition analysis. Secondarily, we aimed to understand the organizational structure of the visited research institute, the perspective of clinicians on end-user registry data, and the potential incorporation of the EQ-5D. Key scientific results: we selected the Medicare dataset with different outcomes, which can easily be substituted by the EQ-5D (see below for an elaborate explanation on this choice). We studied socio-economic inequalities in the use and effectiveness of regional anesthesia in patients undergoing hip or knee arthroplasty. We found a strong relation between hospitals and socioeconomic status, which complicated the use of concentration indices for analyzing health inequalities. Instead, adjusted Population Attributable Risks (PARs) were calculated and a quasi-moderation analysis was performed to determine the effect of socioeconomic and hospital-level factors on the use and effectiveness of regional anesthesia. We consider the adjusted PAR calculation to be a valuable analytical technique for EuroQol research, potentially aiding in determining the relationship between variables of interest and improvements or deteriorations in EQ-5D scores after arthroplasty. Deliverables: one manuscript is being prepared for submission to a high-impact anesthesiology journal, focusing on the presence of access and outcome inequalities of regional anesthesia in hip or knee arthroplasty. The key findings of the secondary aims were: 1. That there is a gap in the current routine collection of PROMs: PROMs are not routinely collected of conservatively treated patients. Promoting the collection of PROMs in this group will open the door to further research, including the use of PROMs in selecting candidates for surgery. Moreover, it will further promote the wide-spread use of PROMs (EQ-5D) in routine care. 2. At the Mount Sinai Hospital, the collection of PROMs is in its early stages, with discussions ongoing to streamline the process within the Orthopedic Surgery department. Furthermore, the routine clinical use of the EQ-5D is limited in the USA. In clinical studies, however, the EQ-5D can be additionally collected. The Mount Sinai Hospital, with its large Orthopedic Surgery department, could serve as a valuable candidate hospital for multicenter studies. 3. Regarding the competitiveness of the EQ-5D compared to other generic PROMs, it is worth noting that US statisticians consider the availability of value sets a clear strength of the EQ-5D. However, in current US policy-making, cost-effectiveness data using quality of health measures are not mandatory nor regarded vital from a clinical point of view. Only if this policy matrix changes in the future, the role of the EQ-5D in the USA could significantly expand. New collaborations/next steps: the exchange project fostered mutual interest between the department of Orthopedic Surgery at Erasmus Medical Center and the visited department at Mount Sinai Hospital. A number of future collaborations are being considered, particularly in utilizing Dutch Orthopedic Registry (EQ-5D) data. In all, I regard my visit as a very fruitful exchange. Valuable delivrables were created as were many opportunities for future collaborations on EuroQol related research in the field of orthopedic outcome research, and on doing advanced inequality analysis in particular. I was pleased that the hosting institute expressed their high esteem of the achievements made. Also, I believe that my personal research skills have markedly developed due to the stimulating environment. I want to thank the EuroQol group and members of the Exec for their support in this work. Without their support, this work would not have been possible.
