Aims: Self-perceived burden (SPB), a patient's perception of the burden their illness imposes on caregivers, is an emerging construct distinct from but related to caregiver burden. This project aimed to advance the understanding of SPB and its measurement, validate the EQ-HWB/EQ-HWB-S for assessing caregiver health and well-being, and explore novel approaches for capturing caregiver spillover effects. Methods: A prospective survey was conducted with 504 patient-caregiver dyads in the United States. Exploratory factor analysis was used to examine dimensionality of SPB in relation to EQ-5D, EQ-HWB, ASCOT-Carer, and Carer-QoL. Intraclass correlation coefficients were employed to assess the level of agreement between care recipients' two perspectives of SPB (their own assessment of SPB and their assessment of caregiver burden, called caregiver burden proxy) and caregivers' self-reported burden. The suitability of care recipients as proxies for caregivers was evaluated by examining the agreement between care recipient proxy assessments and caregiver self-assessments using EQ-5D-5L. Additionally, the measurement properties of EQ-HWB/EQ-HWB-S/EQ-5D-5L for caregivers were investigated in relation to other preference-based measures used for caregivers: ASCOT-Carer, Carer-QoL, and EQ-5D. Results: SPB emerged as a distinct construct, moderately related to EQ measures. Care recipients tended to underestimate the burden they impose compared to caregiver assessments but demonstrated potential to serve as proxies when adopting the caregiver's perspective for SPB (caregiver burden proxy) or assessing caregiver health-related quality of life using EQ-5D-5L. The findings supported the construct validity of EQ-HWB/EQ-HWB-S for assessing caregiver health and well-being. Notably, care recipient proxy assessments introduced a novel approach for capturing caregiver spillover effects in economic evaluations. Conclusion: This work advances EuroQol's research priorities by validating EQ-HWB/EQ-HWB-S for caregivers in the US, and exploring care recipient proxy assessments as an innovative method for capturing spillover effects.
