Background Commensurability between the preference data derived from composite time trade-off (cTTO) and discrete choice experiment (DCE) is unknown. Support for the hybrid approach is based on the high correlation between cTTO scores and latent utilities derived from DCE responses. Correlation alone, however, is not a sufficient criterion. There is considerable information asymmetry associated with cTTO and DCE data; the single comparable property common to both cTTO and DCE, testable at the individual respondent level, is limited to the directional preference of health state A over health state B. Aim The main aim of the study was to investigate the ordinal relationship between cTTO and DCE data generated by individual respondents. The goal was to provide evidence of the (dis)similarity of ordinal preference structures in cTTO and DCE data, both at the individual level and in aggregate. Methods A computer-assisted survey with on-line personal interviews, using the EQ-VT platform, was conducted. Each participant answered a set of 10 cTTO and 12 DCE questions based on 3 fixed choice sets. Circular triads were included in the DCE design. Data was collected from members of the Swedish general public with an estimated 80 responders for each choice set. Data analysis focused on within-respondent concordance between DCE and cTTO preferences as measured by percent agreement and Cohen’s kappa (κ). The impact of proximity/severity of health states were also investigated. Results The analysis sample consisted of 226 interviews. In the cTTO data, each participant evaluated 10 different TTO states, yielding only 6 unique values (mode). Internal consistency as measured by circular triads was high in the DCE data, with 84% fulfilling all circular triads. In terms of ordinal preference consistency, individuals, on average, showed the same ordinal preference for 7.8 out of 12 pairs of health states when comparing DCE and cTTO data. Amongst those that differed, 2.6 pairs were caused by tie values observed in the cTTO data. Thus, the percent agreement was 65.4%, with an average individual Cohen’s kappa κ of 0.35 (0.39 at the aggregate level), suggesting inadequate agreement between the two methods. Both percent agreement and κ became worse as the proximity between states decreased, reaching as low as 45.0% (percent agreement) and 0.18 (κ). The agreement was particularly low when comparing mild to mild states (39.3% and 0.04). Conclusion The findings provided empirical evidence of the dissimilarity of ordinal preference structures in cTTO and DCE data. This result does not support the assumed commensurability of DCE and cTTO data in a single estimation model. The number of tied values observed in the cTTO data indicate potential areas for improvement in its design.
