Abstract Introduction: Health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is a widely used outcome measure in health. However, there is considerable overlap and confusion between HRQoL and other closely related concepts (such as quality of life and well-being). There are many theoretical and applied research publications that use these high level concepts and include domains/dimensions, subdomains and facets. It is desirable to agree on common grounds for future strengthening, development and assessment of generic instruments, and also to inform the recently suggested “deep dive” approach with relevant conceptually descriptive evidence. Bearing this in mind, we undertook the first step of a longer potential stream of work. We performed, through a systematic qualitative literature review, an updated and inclusive conceptual mapping of the commonly used concepts of health related quality of life, quality of life and wellbeing, in order to understand its commonalities and differences. We also aimed to create a conceptual map about the coverage of both the EuroQol family of instruments and commonly used generic measures of these concepts, and their domains, as well as their sub-domains, sub-themes or facets. Methods: This project unfolded in three distinct phases. The initial phase encompassed a systematic literature review specifically targeting qualitative or mixed-methods studies. The focus was on studies analyzing, developing, identifying, or describing any of the three high level concepts targeted by our study: HRQoL, QoL, and well-being, and retrieving domains/dimensions, subdomains and facets as described by the authors. The second phase concluded with the development of conceptual frameworks for HRQoL, QoL, and well-being. This process involved a detailed iterative analysis and curation of domains identified in the literature. The research team deliberately grouped conceptually similar or hierarchically related domains, drawing on the evidence retrieved. In the third phase, generic tools corresponding to each concept were then mapped onto these final working curated conceptual models. Results: Thirty-three frameworks were retrieved from 32 studies. Sixteen related to wellbeing, twelve to HRQoL and five to QoL. The results showed a wide variability of "crude or author named" domains (156 first-level domains, 223 second-level domains and 42 third-level domains) among the frameworks of the three concepts. After domain curation (grouping conceptually similar domains) a total of 110 unique domains encompassing the three high level concepts, each concept was mapped. We found little agreement between the different frameworks of the same concept, and a significant degree of overlap between the three concepts. Conceptual models were made for the HRQoL, QoL and Wellbeing. The objective of these models was to simplify and order the information obtained from the literature. The conceptual framework for HRQoL comprises a total of 38 domains. The conceptual framework for QoL includes HRQoL domains and additional 10 domains, totaling 48 domains. The Wellbeing conceptual framework has a total of 65 domains of which 29 were unique to this concept. The mapping of generic instruments for each concept showed that many instruments contemplate few domains associated with each concept, with the EQ-HWB being the instrument that contemplated the greatest number of domains of the conceptual models for both HRQoL (27 out of 38) and Wellbeing (21 out of 65). Discussion: The absence of clear conceptual definitions poses a major challenge in theoretically differentiating the concepts, which impacts the validity of measurement tools in field research. This paper serves as an initial step, shedding some light -or darkness- on overlooked domains and the comprehensiveness of the tools. Recognizing the need for clearer conceptual definitions and aligned frameworks, it paves the way for new analyses and developments in the understanding and measurement of these essential concepts.
