Background and Aim: Although the EQ-5D-Y was developed for self-report by children over the age of seven years, there is no instrument in the EuroQoL stable developed and validated specifically for younger children and infants. In order to investigate the need for the development of such an instrument, a systematic review of Health Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) measures for children under seven years of age was undertaken. The COSMIN (1)checklist for reviewing outcome measures was used as a framework.Study Design:The search strategy was based on published literature and expert knowledge. A data abstraction form was developed, following COSMIN (2). Information on bibliographic details, instrument development, completion by self/proxy, domains, number of items, response options, frame of reference, recall period, scoring and psychometric results pertaining to validation, reliability and practicality was recorded. Results:Fifteen generic HRQoL measures were identified. The development procedure for most of the instruments was based on the existing literature and expert opinion and all authors claimed to have taken age-appropriateness into account. Many of the measures were extended for proxy use to five years of age but few were developed specifically for children under the age of seven years. Domains were similar across measures and in accord with WHO’s definition of health and components of the HRQoL namely: physical; emotional; social and cognitive. Content validity was judged from the developmental process of the measure. Face validity was reported based on results of the pilot or field testing during the development process. Despite therequirements of FDA guidelines for proxy measures, observable characteristics of the domains were poorly defined and no measure was based purely on observable behaviour. The majority of measures rely on either domain scoring and/or a single summary score.The scoring algorithms for the measures are generally poorly defined. The criterion validity of most of the instruments was established through comparison to a previously developed and validated HRQoL measure. The divergent validity was generally examinedby confirming differences between known-groups. The reliability as measured by internal consistency was reported α≥0.70 for only eight of the measures. Conclusion:There is a need to develop a comprehensive generic, preference-based HRQoL measure for children under the age of seven years as none of the measures reviewed satisfy all of the criteria. The specific aspects that were deficient included: a) The development procedure did not include focus groups of parents of children in the age group to establish the age appropriate behaviour which would represent the HRQoL construct and b) observable domains were not explicitly included and observable behaviour that would inform proxy report was not defined; c) the scoring systems were not necessarily psychometrically sound and the scoring algorithms, where developed, where opaque. There is a lack of preference based measures and several of the instruments were lengthy and valuation sets would be difficult to develop. There may be a need to develop more thanone instrument to measure HRQoL in different age categories for children under the age of seven years.
