Title: Valuing health in children –where are we now, and what further work is needed?Issue: To facilitate the HTA of interventions for younger patients, utilities are needed that reflect the value of health in children and adolescents. However valuing health in children is challengingand raises questions about methodology, ethics and social values. For example: Which preference elicitation techniques should be used? Whose preferences should count (e.g. adults, parents, adolescents)? Under what perspective should those preferences be elicited (e.g. adults valuing health states for themselves or for a child)? Should we aimfor consistency between child and adult health valuation, in terms of both methods and values? Recent research has provided insights on some of these issues, but uncertainties and disagreements remain about the best way forward. Overview: In this issue panel, Koonal Shah will moderate and summarise emerging international research that addresses some of the key challenges. Elly Stolk will describe the development of the first international protocol for valuing the EQ-5D-Y, the youth version of the EQ-5D, and its recent application in Japan. This protocol combines time trade-off (TTO) and discrete-choice experiments to elicit adult preferences, but differs from the protocol for valuing the adult EQ-5D-5L. Donna Rowen will explain her concerns about the use of TTO in this setting and examine what alternative approaches are possible, focusing on how other measures such as CHU9D have been valued. She will also highlight current research gaps. Rosie Lovett will provide the perspective of an HTA agency exploring whether to issue guidance to companies about measuring and valuing child health. She will focus on questions about consistency and outline what further work would help agencies like NICE to make methodological recommendations. Following the brief presentations, 30 minutes will be reserved for panel and audience discussion, with questions and suggestions on how to reach consensus particularly welcomed.
