There is ample evidence that time preference, i.e. the importance individuals assign to health now and in the future, can influence EQ-5D valuation. There is, however, no consensus on how time preference could and should be measured in valuation of EQ-5D, with different solutions suggested for EQ-VT and stand-alone DCE. This project, split into three parts, aimed to answer the following research questions: 1) Which methods for measuring time preference exist and how do they differ? 2) Which methods appear promising for use in valuation of EQ-5D? 3) What is the internal consistency, level of difficulty, and time needed for completion for promising methods for measuring time preference? 4) Can a promising method for measuring time preferences at an individual level be included into stand-alone DCE valuation? Part 1 of this project involved a systematic review of methods for measuring time preference developed in various disciplines, which identified a total of 86 unique methods. Evidence synthesis, supported by a team of experts, involved categorising methods by a list of theoretical and operational characteristics defined with expert input. From this review, 5 promising methods for measuring time preference in EQ-5D were obtained, of which 2 required substantial adaptations to be fit for purpose. In Part 2, the feasibility and validity of these methods was determined in an online self-completed experiment with a general public sample. Only a single method provided acceptable validity. In project 3, this method (after further adaptation) was incorporated into an EQ-5D-3L valuation study, and the conceptual basis was developed for incorporating estimates from this method into composite time trade-off. Unfortunately, discount rates obtained from the adapted method were unrealistically high, rendering it of little use for EQ-5D valuation (i.e. making its application in DCE valuation not feasible). Collectively, the results of these 3 projects suggest that although many methods exist for measuring time preference, no method exists that has both theoretically appealing characteristics but is also feasible for online self-completion.
