Ethiopia is the second most populated country and one of the fastest-growing economies in Africa. Population between the ages of 10 and 19 accounts for 42 percent of Ethiopia's total population. Its recent development of HTA system recommends the use of societal preferences for valuing health states and social health insurance. Therefore, there is a rising need for research on youth health measurement and valuation in this country. The goal of this PhD project is to improve health measurement and valuation for children and adolescents in Ethiopia. Specific objectives include to assess the equivalence in measurement properties between EQ-5D-Y-3L and -5L Amharic interview-assist (IA) and proxy modes of administration, to develop a value set for the EQ-5D-Y-3L using the international valuation protocol, and to investigate the difference in EQ-5D-Y values elicited from adults and adolescents. First, a systematic literature review will be undertaken on the topic of measurement equivalence across modes of administration. Then, the psychometric performance of IA and proxy of both Y-3L and Y-5L will be tested and compared using a cross-sectional study design among young population aged 5–15 years with a known health conditions (n = 600) and a control group of 'healthy' school children (n = 300). The instruments will be administered again 10 days after the first interview using the same mode of administration to a subgroup of participants from a general school sample and those with chronic disease conditions in order to evaluate test-retest reliability and responsiveness in those who have changed health conditions. Third, the valuation study will be conducted in accordance with the international EQ-5D-Y valuation protocol. The fourth part is a methodological add on study connected to the main valuation study: DCE and TTO values for EQ-5D-Y-3L health states will also be elicited from adolescents to enable comparison of adult proxy and adolescent self perspectives, which has not been done for TTO yet.
