This grant provided funding to support the dissemination of research findings through a poster presentation in the “Patient-Centered Research” section at the ISPOR Europe 2024 Conference which was held between 17 and 20 November 2024, in Spain. The study, “Can EuroQol Instruments be Used to Study Climate Change? Validity and Responsiveness of the EQ-5D-5L, EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S to Measure Health and Wellbeing Impact of Heatwaves Among Older Adults” [PCR299], assesses the validity and responsiveness of EQ-5D-5L, EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S for measuring the health and wellbeing impact of heatwaves among older adults. The study uses data from a cohort of Chinese residents aged 60 and above, surveyed four times in 2023. The study found that the EQ-5D-5L, EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S demonstrate satisfactory known-groups validity, though limited responsiveness, in measuring the health and wellbeing impact of heatwaves. The project is funded by the EuroQol Research Foundation (1599-RA). The study provides strategic value to the EuroQol Group by generating important evidence on the psychometric performance of EQ-5D instruments. It is particularly significant as it supports the introduction of the EQ-HWB-S and EQ-HWB, aligning with the symposium at ISPOR Europe 2024 Conference, “Going Beyond Health-Related Quality of Life: Towards a Broader QALY Measure for Use Across Sectors: Introducing the EQ Health and Wellbeing Short (EQ-HWB-S) ”. Furthermore, this research contributes to the growing field of climate change studies, which represents one of the most pressing public health challenges of the century. This contribution will enhance the EuroQol Group’s reputation beyond the traditional healthcare research community. The travel grant significantly supported my ability to disseminate important findings at ISPOR Europe 2024, contributing to the broader discussion on the role of EuroQol instruments in addressing global challenges like climate change. The experience has also fostered my professional growth.
