Background: Comprehensively measuring the outcomes of interventions and programmes impacting both health and broader areas of quality of life is important in the allocation of resources across these sectors. Increasingly, broad quality of life (QoL) measures are being developed to capture outcomes beyond health-related quality of life (HRQoL) measures. Jointly exploring the dimensionality of diverse instruments can improve our understanding about their evaluative space and how they build on, and extend, measures widely used in health care decision making such as the EQ-5D. The aim of this study was to explore the measurement relationship between five broader QoL measures and the most widely used measure of HRQoL in healthcare decision making (the EQ-5D) Methods: The included instruments comprised a pool of 126 items. The measurement relationship was explored using qualitative and quantitative dimensionality assessment methods. This included a content analysis and exploratory factor analyses which were used to develop a confirmatory factor (CFA) model of the broader QoL dimensions. Correlations between the identified dimensions and participants’ self-reported overall health and wellbeing were also explored. Results: The final CFA model exhibited acceptable/good fit (RMSEA=0.046 and CFI=0.901) and described 12 QoL dimensions (i.e., factors): ‘psychological symptoms’, ‘social relations’, ‘physical functioning’, ‘emotional resilience’, ‘pain’, ‘cognition’, ‘financial needs’, ‘discrimination’, ‘Outlook on life/growth’, ‘public services’, ‘living environment’, and ‘control over life’. All dimensions were positively and significantly correlated to self-reported health and wellbeing, but the magnitudes and relative differences in associations varied considerably (e.g., ‘pain’ had the strongest correlation with overall health but among the weakest correlations with wellbeing). Conclusions: This study contributes to a broader understanding of QoL by exploring the dimensionality and relationships among various QoL measures. A number of the dimensions identified are HRQoL focused, with others covering broader constructs. Our findings offer insights for the development of comprehensive instruments, or use of instrument suites that capture multidimensional aspects of QoL. Further research should explore the relevance of the identified dimensions in different settings and populations, and in particular scrutinize the feasibility and appropriateness of measuring the identified dimensions to inform resource allocation.
