Introduction: Since the introductionof the EQ-5D-5L (5L) a growing body of literature comparedthe measurement properties of the 5L with the original three-level EQ-5D (3L). So far comparisons on responsiveness for change are rare. This study compares the responsiveness of the 3L and the 5L descriptive systems and (index)values, using two available longitudinal datasetsof rehabilitation patients with mild/moderate health problems,and of stroke patients with severe health problems. We separated descriptive from value effectsfollowinga previous 3L-5L comparative study, whichshowed that 3L descriptions systematically overestimate the presence of health problems, leading to biased 3L valuesand an over-or underestimation ofdiscriminatory power. Methods: First, descriptive results were compared cross-sectionally. Second, inconsistencies between 3L and 5L were determined (3L improves while 5L deteriorates within patient or vice versa). Descriptive responsiveness was tested through the% changed level responses (‘moves’) from baselineto follow-up, % of improved patients (a.o. according to the Paretianclassification of health change, PCHC), and the probability of superiority(PS), a non-parametric effect size measure. Subsequently wecalculated values based on ten country-specific value sets for both patient samples. Responsivenessof these values was assessed throughthe standardized response mean (SRM) and standardized effectsize (SES), using the level sumscore as reference. External anchors to classify patients into change categories were based on a self-rated health question (rehabilitation sample), and the modified Rankin Scale (mRS) and Barthel Index (stroke sample).Relative efficiency of 5L over 3L was assessed by calculating ratios of the SRM and SES statistics.Results: Cross-sectional descriptive comparisons confirmedearlier evidence and showed an overestimation for health problems in 3L. Change inconsistencies between 3L and 5L were rare(average 1.0% bydimension for rehabilitation; 1.1% for stroke). Averagelevelmoves per respondent were 0.16 (3L) vs. 0.30 (5L) in rehabilitation, and 0.34(3L) vs. 0.58 (5L) in stroke (by dimension). 50% (3L) vs. 60% (5L) of patients improved in rehabilitation, while 51% (3L) vs. 44% (5L)in stroke (PCHC). The average PS,however,showed better performance of 5L over 3L in both samples (rehabilitation: PS3L= 0.57, PS5L= 0.59, stroke: PS3L=0.59, PS5L= 0.63). Using external anchors, 5L index values demonstrated larger responsiveness in rehabilitation patients, independently from value set and method. In stroke patients, however, 3L showed larger SES/SRMs compared to 5L, except for the SRM results on the mRS anchor, where results were similar. Relative efficiency results for rehabilitation indicated that 5L outperformed3L strongly for SRM and slightly for SESresults. In stroke 3L outperformed5L slightly (SRM) tomoderately (SES) for the Barthel Index anchor-based data while for mRS3L was moderately better for SES but similar to 5L for SRM. Conclusions: Descriptive responsiveness of 5L generally outperformed 3L in both clinical groups; the same was true for valueresponsiveness in rehabilitation, but not in stroke. As in previous cross-sectional comparisons, descriptive results were the main driver of the 3L/5L specific differences in responsiveness. Responsiveness of 3L was influenced by the 'confinedto bed' label. The overestimation bias of 3L affected all responsiveness results.Most likelythis bias will impact QALY estimations, leading to over-or underestimations of QALYs gaineddepending on the condition and condition severity.QALYs based on 5Lwill result in more precise estimates.
