Background: There is limited evidence on the psychometric properties of the EQ-5D-Y-5L and the EQ-HWB-9 in Canada. Inherited bleeding disorders imposes significant impact on health-related quality of life (HRQoL) of children, adults, and their families. Due to the genetic nature of these conditions, symptoms often appear in childhood and have a lifelong impact on patients. Some caregivers are also affected as patients. This unique population composition makes inherited bleeding disorders particularly well-suited for validating EQ instruments. Aims: To validate the EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-HWB-9 among patients and caregivers living with inherited bleeding disorders in Canada. Methods: In collaboration with Canadian Hemophilia Society, a cross-sectional survey will be developed and administered online across Canada. The target respondents include two groups: 1) children and adult patients diagnosed with an inherited bleeding disorder; and 2) their caregivers. The survey will be distributed by email through the Canadian Bleeding Disorder Registry. It will contain three sections related to: 1) sociodemographic (e.g., age, gender, province of residence) and clinical characteristics (e.g., type of bleeding disorder, disease severity); 2) HRQoL burden; and 3) economic burden. HRQoL will be assessed using generic and disease-specific instruments. The generic instruments include the EQ-5D-5L (self-complete by adult patients) or EQ-5D-Y-5L (parent proxy) for pediatric patients, and the EQ-HWB-9 for caregivers. The disease-specific instrument is the Parent’s Index Version of the Haemophilia Quality of Life Questionnaire for Children (Haemo-QOL). The psychometric properties of the EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-HWB-9 will be assessed according to their health profiles, distributional properties, known groups validity, and convergent and divergent validity.Benefits to the group: Development of the EQ-5D-Y-5L and the EQ-HWB-9 are currently strategic priorities of the EuroQol Group. This research addresses a critical evidence gap in Canada, where more data is needed to support the use of the Y-5L in HTA and reimbursement decisions. The study also aligns with the Canadian Hemophilia Society’s priority to better measure disease burden. Including the Y-5L and EQ-HWB-9 offers opportunities to expand their psychometric evidence, explore transitions between EQ instruments, and build a sustainable partnership with CHS. By funding this work, the EuroQol Group can advance its global strategic goals and enhance its presence in Canadian policy and clinical settings.
