Background: This project aimed to quantify the frequency of health fluctuations over time, identify affected HRQoL dimensions and evaluate whether past fluctuations are considered in assessing today's health using the EQ-5D-5L in people living with dementia where spells of good and bad days are common. Methods: This study was an explorative, single-group, observational study with daily measure points that combined quantitative and qualitative (mixed) methods. Caregivers of persons with dementia completed a daily diary for 14 days, documenting health fluctuations and the affected HRQoL dimension. Also, caregivers and patients completed the EQ-5D-5L (proxy- & self-reported) on days one, seven and 14. Subsequently, caregivers were interviewed about documented health fluctuations and whether these fluctuations were considered in the EQ-5D-5L assessment of today's health. Results: Health fluctuations occurred in 96% of cases and every second day (50% of daily assessments). The most frequently affected HRQoL dimensions were memory and mobility, followed by concentration, sleep, pain/ discomfort, and usual activities. A higher fluctuation in the diary was associated with a higher EQ-5D-5L health state variation. Patients with a moderate to high fluctuation had the highest LSS and health utility change and the highest non-adherence to the EQ-5D-5L recall period (31% vs 17%) compared to patients with a low health fluctuation. The non-adherence to the EQ-5D-5L recall period of today was also significantly higher in patients with improved health states than in patients with deteriorated health states (37% vs 9%), which was confirmed by qualitative interview data. Conclusion: Health state fluctuations frequently occur in dementia. A higher fluctuation was associated with larger changes in health utilities and non-adherence to the EQ-5D's recall period of today. However, the results are based on small sample size, limiting its generalizability. Therefore, further research is needed to confirm demonstrated results. Secondly, future research should evaluate if longer recall periods, like those of the EQ-HWB(-S), capture recurrent health fluctuations more appropriately, resulting in higher reliability and recall period adherence.
