Introduction: Almost a quarter of Indonesia's 250 million citizens live in Western Java. The Dr. Hasan Sadikin Hospital (RSHS), in Bandung City, is a major referral hospital for the region. RSHS Neurosurgery Unit admits patients following major trauma or other neurological conditions. Little is currently known about neurosurgery patient outcomes in Indonesia, particularly regarding factors preceding admission and following discharge. Prior to our study, patients were often discharged with limited follow-up. Our study sought to describe the characteristics of patients admitted to, and discharged from, the Neurosurgery Unit and to assess the feasibility of undertaking follow-up telephone interviews post-discharge. Of 184 consenting patients, 46% were admitted because of trauma/injury, 37% brain tumour, 9% sudden health event (mostly cerebrovascular accident), and 8% other conditions. The majority had a mild (77%) or moderate (20%) GCS on admission; mean age was 41 years. Trauma patients spent an average of 8 days in hospital; non-trauma patients 21 days. Most (97%) were discharged back to their pre-admission residence. Despite the majority (88%) living more than one hour away from RSHS, 83% were able to attend a clinical follow-up appointment. Clinicians reported that the process of undertaking this study, and obtaining patients' contact details, enabled a much higher follow-up appointment rate than had previously occurred. By the time of the one-month interview: five patients had not reached the scheduled follow-up date, six had died, six were uncontactable; 154 completed an interview. Of these, a high proportion reported extreme problems pre-discharge for the dimensions of mobility (21%), self-care (23%), and usual activities (38%). Proportions had reduced by one-month, but were still high (12%, 12% and 18% respectively). Most reported no or slight problems with pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression at both time points (85% - 95% and 96% - 97% respectively). Conclusion: This study has shown it is feasible to follow neurosurgery patients by telephone one month after hospital discharge. A high proportion of patients still reported difficulties with mobility, self-care and usual activities. Data collected at the remaining two and three-month interviews will continue to provide valuable infonnation about both longer-tenn outcomes and feasibility of follow-up. Methods: Eligible patients were aged .!:18 years, admitted to RSHS Neurosurgery Unit (19/10/2015 - 17/02/2016), and subsequently discharged. Baseline data was collected on admission from clinical notes by registered nurses. An in-person interview (conducted in the Indonesian language) was held 1-2 days pre­ discharge; follow-up telephone interviews were scheduled for one, two and three months post-discharge. Socio-demographic and clinical characteristics, health pathways, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), and EQ-5D- 5L data were collected. Data were recorded on a patient case report form and entered into an electronic database. Statistical analyses included proportions for categorical data, means for normally distributed data, and a student t-test for comparison of means. Results: There were 217 patients admitted to the Neurosurgery Unit during the recruitment period; 33 died before discharge. All surviving patients (n=184) consented to participate but four were discharged prior to an interview being arranged and nine were still in hospital, therefore 171 (93%) completed a pre-discharge interview.
