Introduction: Bolt-on dimensions can enhance the descriptive system of the EQ-5D by capturing additional treatment benefits not covered by the core five dimensions. Previous studies have shown improved psychometric properties with bolt-ons, but conventional valuation studies for bolt-ons are cost-prohibitive. The partially-fixed "scaling factor" model, which uses existing value set parameters adjusted with a scale parameter, offers a cost-effective alternative. This study aimed to evaluate the feasibility and performance of the scaling factor model in valuing bolt-on dimensions for the EQ-5D in China and Italy, using both cTTO and hybrid designs. Methods: Two bolt-ons, EQ-PSO (itching and self-confidence) and social relationships, were selected for valuation in China and Italy, respectively. In China, 401 participants valued EQ-7D health states using cTTO. In Italy, 200 participants completed cTTO tasks, and 1000 participants completed DCE tasks for EQ-6D states. Data was modeled using standard main-effects and scaling factor approaches in which parameters from existing national value sets were used. Model performance was evaluated by predicting observed, out-of-sample health state cTTO values. Results: The scaling factor model showed high predictive accuracy in both countries. In China, the scaling factor model using the new value set achieved similar accuracy to the standalone model. In Italy, the scaling factor model performed slightly worse than the standalone model, with marginal differences between cTTO-only and hybrid models. The scale parameters indicated a reduction in the size of coefficients for core dimensions, confirming bolt-on’s compression effect observed in previous studies. Discussions: The scaling factor model appears to be a viable and robust approach for developing bolt-on value sets. This method could facilitate cost-efficient application of bolt-ons in health economics and outcomes research when EQ-5D is considered to be inadequate due to its lack of specificity.
