Background: Few preference-weighted health-related quality-of-life (HRQoL) measures exist for use in children under 5 years of age limiting their inclusion in cost-utility analyses and resulting health care resource allocation decisions. This project sought to develop and assess a modification of the EQ-5D-Y HRQoL instrument for children aged 2-4 years. Methods Purposive sampling at the Royal Children’s Hospital in Melbourne, Australia was used to recruit parents of children 2-4 years for online focus groups. Parents provided feedback on each dimension of the EQ-5D-Y. Qualitative findings guided the design of adaptations to the instrument that were then piloted and refined. Parents completed an online survey and a 4 week follow up to test the psychometric properties of the adapted versus original EQ-5D-Y instrument. Families were recruited from the Royal Children’s Hospital and via online panels. The distribution of responses was described for the total sample and children with and without special health care needs. Psychometric tests for ceiling effects (>15% of responses at highest level), known group validity (Cohen’s d effect sizes for pre-specified groups), test-rest (intraclass correlation coefficients) and responsiveness (standardized response mean effect sizes) were conducted using level sum scores. Results Online focus groups were conducted with 19 parents of well children and those with medical conditions. Parents provided a range of examples of how each domain related to their children, and suggested alternative wording to improve the applicability of the instrument to this age group. Modifications were made on this basis and tested again with a subset of original focus group participants to refine. 842 parents of children aged 2-4 years completed the online survey with 513 (61%) completing follow-up. Respondents reported more problems in each dimension with the adapted EQ-5D-Y than with the original instrument (for example, 66% reported no problems on the Usual Activities dimensions on the adapted EQ-5D-Y-5L version compared to 78% with the original instrument). The adapted instrument more strongly differentiated children with and without special health care needs based on Cohen’s D effect size compared to the original (EQ-5D-Y-5L adapted ES=1.01 (0.83-1.19), EQ-5D-Y-5L original ES=0.83 (0.52-1.14)). Test-retest was generally more reliable for the adapted versus original instrument. Responsiveness for children with improved and worsened health [assessed using a general health rating scale] at 4 weeks was consistent with size of effect expected (EQ-5D-Y-5L adapted- better health SRM=0.2, no change in health SRM=-0.05, and worse health SRM=-0.41). Conclusions and implications: It was possible to produce an adapted version of the EQ-5D-Y with considerable input from parents. The adapted EQ-5D-Y for 2-4 year olds was found to be more sensitive, valid and reliable than the original EQ-5D-Y, and thereby provides a means of extending measurement of HRQoL into this younger age group with a relatively simple modification. This in turn provides an important step towards valid and consistent measurement of HRQOL across the lifespan and may make it possible to obtain values for health states in these younger ages. However, important questions remain in relation to valuation of the adapted EQ-5D-Y, including whether a specific value set is required or a mapping approach, consistency across age for utility values generated, appropriate sample and perspective for valuation, and some feasible approaches for anchoring.
