Abstract Objectives: The EQ Health and Wellbeing (EQ-HWB) is a new measure developed by the EuroQol group for evaluating interventions in health, public health, and social care, including the impact on patients, social care users, and carers. In response to emerging feedback on comprehensibility and acceptability, a modified version has been developed. This study aimed to compare the psychometric performance of the modified and original EQ-HWB-S using a randomised two-arm survey administered to the Australian general public. Methods: An online survey of 1,087 Australian adults collected data on health status, demographics, informal caregiving, happiness, the EQ-5D-5L, and either the original (n = 542) or modified (n = 545) EQ-HWB-S. Psychometric evaluation focused on acceptability (missing data), distributional properties (ceiling/floor effects), convergent validity and known-groups validity. Convergent validity at item level was examined by evaluating whether items of the EQ-HWB-S and the modified EQ-HWB-S correlate with similar items of the generic EQ-5D-5L based on a priori hypotheses. Convergent validity at instrument level was based on EQ-HWB-S level sum scores. Known-group validity was evaluated across 12 subgroups, including informal carers, carers of individuals with a dementia diagnosis, self-rated health, self-rated happiness, and presence of ongoing medical conditions. Results: Overall, the modified version performed better or similarly to the original in terms of acceptability, floor and ceiling effect, convergent validity and known group validity. The modified version showed stronger convergent validity at instrument level when comparing sum scores with both versions correlating highly with the EQ-5D-5L sum scores r = 0.668 for the original version and r = 0.705 for the modified version. For item-level convergent validity, the modified version showed stronger correlations, particularly between items with similar constructs, such as “Feeling anxious” and “Feeling sad or depressed” with the EQ-5D-5L Anxiety/Depression item. Regarding known-group validity, the modified version demonstrated better known-group validity across six groups either with significant p-value or higher effect sizes (feeling happy, chronic pain, COPD, diabetes, heart disease, and hypertension), comparable performance in three groups (dementia, arthritis, and depression) and performed less effectively in three groups (carers, good health status, and asthma) compared to the original version. At the instrument level, using sum scores, the modified version also performs similarly to the original, even when demographic variables are considered. However, the modified version did not differentiate well between carers and non-carers, in contrast to the original version. Conclusions: Using data from a rigorously designed, two-armed randomised survey, we showed that the modified version performs better or similarly to the original version across most psychometric domains. However, the modified version's limited effectiveness in differentiating between carers and non-carers highlights an important area for further investigation.
