Abstract Background:There is very limitedempirical evidence in the English National Health Service (NHS)–or indeed from any country –on how the clinical quality ofprimary care impactson patients’ self-reported health. This study sets out to address this gap in the literature, using EQ-5D data. Aims:The primary aim of this paper is to explore what policy-relevant general practice factors, in particular the clinical quality of primary care, affect patients’ self-reported healthin England as measured by the EQ-5D-5L instrument. Data:We usedata from the GP Patient Survey (GPPS) and the national Quality and Outcomes Framework (QOF) datasets in England between financial years 2012/13 and 2015/16. The two datasets are linked by general practice and financial year. The linked dataset covers most general practices in England with around 7,500 to 8,000 practices included in each year.In the GPPS dataset, EQ-5D-5L data are recorded as the number(and %) of patients,at general practice level,ineach level and dimension. From this, we derive two measures of health for each general practice: (1) the practice-level EQ-5D-5L level sum scoreand (2) the practice level EQ-5D-5L indices.To measure the clinical quality of general practices based on the QOF dataset, we calculate two types ofmeasures: the practice level population achievement rate and the proportion of clinical QOF points achieved out of the total achievable clinical QOF points. Methods:We estimate linear panel data multiple regression models with controls for patient and practice characteristics by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)method and with random and fixed practice effects. In sensitivity analyses, we explore the effects of non-response in the GPPS, lagged effects of clinical quality, and of including non-clinical QOF indicators inthemeasure of clinicalquality. Results:Clinical quality and patients’self-reported health exhibit considerable variation between general practices but not within practices over time. Theabsolute unconditional cross-section correlations between the clinical quality and EQ-5D measures in 2015/16 are between 0.0626and 0.0748. TheOLS and practice random effect multiple regression models suggest that clinical quality has a statisticallysignificant positive effect on improving patients’self-reported healthmeasured by the EQ-5D-5L instrument. The results are consistent whenapplying two proxies for clinical quality measurements and two proxies for patients’self-reported healthmeasurements. However, once we allow for unobserved time invariant practice characteristics with fixed effects regressions the effects are not significant. Discussion:This study is one of the first attempts to use national GPPS and QOF datasets in England to explore the relationship between clinical quality of primary care and patients’ self-reported health as measured by the EQ-5D. The findings suggest that improvements in general practice clinical quality as measured by QOF indicators are not associated with improvements in patient self-reported health as measured by EQ-5D.This may be because there is a lag in the effect of clinical quality on health or because the QOF indicators are a mix of process measures and intermediate outcome measures.
