A total of 18 potential interviewers were selected to undergo the three‐day valuation workshop. Two esteemed EuroQol Board Members, together with the Investigator Team moderated the workshop. The entire workshop was held at Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang. On the first day of the workshop, held at the Main Meeting Room of the School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, the participants were exposed to the various concepts and interview techniques pertaining to the Valuation Study. A series of comprehensive lectures were delivered by experts from the Investigator Team and by one of the invited representative from EuroQoL. The participants were also familiarized to the interview script by are corded mock session of the interview (Appendix1), besides practising the script among colleagues. These cond day of the workshop included mock interview sessions organized at the lobby are alocated beside the university’s Main Library. Each participant interviewed a minimum of five individuals using the official script of the Valuation Study. The Investigator Team evaluated each participant’s performance to ensure only well‐prepared interviewers are selected to participate in the Valuation Study. The final day of the workshop included a round‐table discussion held again at the Main Meeting Room of the School of Pharmaceutical Sciences. The participants had a chance of sharing their experience of conducting the mock interviews and raise any queries pertaining to the interviews. Generally, the participants shared that they enjoyed their new experience of interviewing and encountering interviewees from different walks of life. The invited guests from EuroQoL were generous in sharing their expert advice and experience in conducting such interviews. Additionally, the performance of the participants’ mock interviews was also formally reviewed using official quality control methods adopted by EuroQoL. Each of the 18 participants passed the performance review and were selected to represent the Valuation Study Team of Interviewers. Overall, the moderators of the workshop were very satisfied with the participation, enthusiasm, and energy of the participants of the workshop and hoped that that would follow through the entire Valuation Study.
