Objective: The newly developed EQ-HWB widened the classification system of preference-based measures to capture aspects beyond health. However, the larger number of aspects presents challenges for eliciting preferences for health and wellbeing attributes to generate a value set. This project assesses the feasibility of valuing EQ-HWB using Discrete Choice Experiment (DCE) for EQ-HWB attributes, a larger number than EQ-HWB-S. The study assesses whether DCE is a feasible method and whether results are affected by: 1) design and anchoring methods; 2) different model specifications; 3) attribute ordering of whether health or wellbeing attributes are presented first; and 4) country of participants, comparing public samples from the UK and Australia. Method: To inform the study a systematic review was undertaken of DCE health state valuation studies. EQ-HWB items for valuation were selected based on dimensionality, item performance, stakeholder preference, international and cultural feasibility, and existing qualitative evidence. This study applied mixed-methods to generate multi-dimensional evidence on valuation: 1) four focus groups with UK participants from the general public were undertaken to inform the design, wording and formatting of the large online surveys; 2) three DCE surveys with different formats were each conducted with UK and Australia general public samples; 3) DCE results were modelled for each format and country and compared. Two surveys were conducted using DCE with a duration attribute (DCETTO) with either health or wellbeing dimensions presented first (health-first DCETTO, wellbeing-first DCETTO) and one survey used a triplet design involving two profiles and death (triplet DCE-Death). Participants were recruited from existing panels to be representative for sex, age and education. DCE data were analyzed using a conditional logit model with additive main effect utility function, and a cross-attribute level effects model (CALE), assuming the disutility of all attributes had identical proportional relationship with disutility at level 5. Preference variation was evaluated by the relative importance of attributes, distribution of health states, range of anchored utilities and the proportion of states worse than dead. Results: 13 of 25 EQ-HWB items were selected for valuation. Focus group participants (n=11) found DCETTO and DCE-Death tasks using the 13 EQ-HWB attributes to be feasible. There was no evidence to support revision of the online survey following a small-scale pilot (n=100). Overall, 2017 UK and 2000 Australian participants completed one of the surveys. Modelled UK results suggest that DCETTO and DCE-Death were both feasible, though the range of utilities and proportion of health states worse than dead varied by task. Attributes with the highest utility decrements were consistent (pain, seeing and daily activities). The number of insignificant (relative to level 1 and 10% significance) and logically inconsistent attributes for DCETTO and DCE-Death were 7%/31% and 7%/33% respectively. Compared with the additive model, the CALE model utilities were more evenly distributed and had no insignificant or logically inconsistent levels. Information ordering had little effect on anchored results, but UK and Australian participants revealed varied preferences. Conclusions and contributions: This study proves that it is feasible to value a longer measure of health and wellbeing using DCE. The study has benefited from qualitative research to inform the DCE surveys and conducting the surveys across two different countries. The results indicate that both DCETTO and DCE-Death tasks were feasible though there are some impacts on results from using the different tasks.
