Background: The EQ VAS shows substantial variation across populations that cannot be fully explained by health status or demographic characteristics. The PI’s recent systematic review of 127 studies (N≈980,000) reported a pooled mean EQ VAS of 79.0 (95% CI 78.2 to 79.8) with extreme heterogeneity (I²=99.83%), of which meta-regression analyses explained only 12.55% using study-level and population characteristics. In addition, recent evidence from Olsen et al. (2025) demonstrated that individuals reporting identical EQ-5D-5L profiles exhibit marked education gradients in EQ VAS scores. Together, these findings suggest that reliance on EQ-5D-5L index values alone may understate the magnitude of education-related differences in self-reported health, potentially due to socioeconomic differences in adaptation processes and the omission of key psychosocial dimensions.Methods: Project UNVEIL will analyse the harmonised EQ-DAPHNIE dataset (15 countries; N≈67,000) using a two-phase design. Phase 1 quantifies cross-country and individual-level variation in EQ VAS using multilevel modelling. Phase 2 extends the within-profile framework by investigating heterogeneity in EQ VAS among individuals with identical EQ-5D-5L health states, explained by key socioeconomic proxies: education, relative income (country-specific quartiles), and employment. Furthermore, it calculates country-specific underestimation factors and investigates the influence of health behaviours and bolt-on dimensions such as fatigue/energy and sleep.Impact: By identifying when and why EQ-5D-5L underestimates health inequalities, this study will inform EuroQol’s work on response heterogeneity and provide empirical evidence to guide bolt-on development priorities. Key outputs will include country-specific underestimation factors, a decision framework for equity sensitive analyses, and a policy brief for health technology assessment bodies. These outputs will help ensure that population norms and priority setting decisions do not systematically understate the burden of socioeconomic disadvantage.
