Objectives: Providing policy makers with value sets is a crucial part of EuroQol’s work and enables our instruments to be widely used in HTA and other settings. However, given the long history of EuroQol’s work, and the number of existing valuation studies, many of our value sets are now old, based on potentially outdated valuation methodology, and in popu-lations which no longer represent the contemporary population. Assuming EuroQol wants a role in endorsing approved value sets - or at least a way of identifying priorities for in-vesting in new value sets - having a clear strategy for identification and mitigation of re-dundancy is important to ensure policy makers retain confidence in their country-specific value sets. Methods Through discussion and iteration with our international authorship team, we have constructed a taxonomy of redundancy. We have explored how the different types of redundancy might be identified, and how the EuroQol group might work with local policy makers to address redundancy, and therefore ensure our instruments remain relevant for use. Results The taxonomy of redundancy consists of four main areas, based on both redundancy and obsolescence. These are that the value set no longer aligns with current normative HTA requirements; that the methods used to generate it are no longer considered robust or adequately close to best practice; that the population composition has moved too far from the population in which the original value set was derived; and that, even after controlling for population differences, preferences are likely to have changed since original data collection. Through identification of the type of redundancy that applies in a particular setting, we then suggest a range of possible solutions to each, ranging from recommending particular sensitivity analyses, through reweighting of existing data to better account for population differences, to collecting new data for an updated value set. Conclusion: Redundancy of existing value sets is driven by more than just time since data collection and is often a matter of judgment rather than based on a clear definition. Working closely with local policy makers, in manner appropriate to the local environment, to discuss the ongoing appropriateness of existing value sets is an important part of EuroQol’s ongoing role, and includes the consideration of updating value sets in contemporary populations using current best-practice methods. However, the benefits of updating value sets has to be balanced against the desire of policy makers for consistency in their local decision-making processes.
