Background: The EQ Health and Wellbeing (EQ-HWB), unlike other EuroQol instruments, was not developed with a visual analogue scale (VAS). VAS may provide information that is not captured in descriptive system therefore exploring a VAS for the EQ-HWB is recommended. Several anchors - health, wellbeing, quality of life, health and wellbeing, and health and quality of life - may be considered for the EQ-HWB. Selection of an appropriate EQ-HWB VAS requires evidence on how those completing the VAS understand these different anchors. To provide evidence supporting the potential inclusion of a VAS in the EQ-HWB-9, this mixed-methods study aims to evaluate the five possible anchors each with a 7-day recall period. Methods: Cross-sectional data from a representative sample of the Hungarian adult general population (n=2000) was collected in August-September 2025. At the beginning of the survey, respondents completed six open-ended questions exploring their interpretations of the best and worst health, wellbeing and quality of life they could imagine presented in random order. Subsequently, each respondent was randomly assigned to one of five EQ-HWB VAS versions (health, wellbeing, quality of life, health and wellbeing, and health and quality of life). As part of this project, we will assess linguistic interpretation, psychometric performance, and conceptual alignment with the EQ-HWB-9 descriptive system. Open-ended responses on the best and worst imaginable states of health, wellbeing, and quality of life will be examined through manual content analysis and artificial intelligence (AI)-assisted approaches, including i) sentiment analysis, ii) topic modelling, and iii) large language model (LLM)-supported thematic analysis. Mixed-methods analyses will involve linking the results of manual coding and AI-assisted text analyses with EQ-HWB VAS responses to identify how respondents’ interpretations may influence their scores. Quantitative analyses will be used to assess distributional properties, convergent and known-group validity, and explanatory power of the five EQ-HWB-9 VAS versions. Combining these methods enables triangulation across analytical approaches and strengthens the robustness and interpretability of the results. The findings will provide evidence to guide the decision on inclusion of a VAS in the EQ-HWB-9. Furthermore, this project presents an innovative AI-assisted analytical framework that broadens the methodological scope of the EuroQol research portfolio.
