Introduction: Currently, no value sets exist to support the use of EQ-5D-Y health states in cost-effectiveness analyses. One of the challenges associated with generating these value sets is that standard valuation methods are cognitively demanding and may not be appropriate for younger individuals to complete. However, asking adults to complete a valuation task from the perspective of a child/adolescent presents its own challenges. In this study we collected adolescent and adult responses to a discrete choice experiment (DCE). The aim was to evaluate whether there are systematic differences in preferences between these two groups when they make choices between EQ-5D-Y health states.Methods: An online survey was designed containing a DCE plus background and debrief questions. The DCE comprised 15 pairwise choices between EQ-5D-Y health states. A sample of UK adults was asked to consider the health of a 10-year-old child when completing the tasks. In contrast, a sample of UK adolescents (11-17 years) received the same survey and completed the tasks considering their own health. Mixed logit models with correlated parameters were estimated for both samples based on prior research. To understand whether preferences between the two groups were different,accounting for any scaledifferences,we conducted the Swait-Louviere test. To ensure the comparisons accounted for potential differences in scale between the two samples, we used the relative 2parameter importance of the attribute levels and an examination of differences in predicted choice probabilities. Results: In total, 1,000 adults and 1,005 adolescents completed the survey. The relative importance of the levels attached greatest disutility to level 3 in pain/discomfort (PD3) followed by anxiety/depression (AD3)in both groups. The third-worst level differed: mobility (MO3)for adolescents; and usual activities (UA3)for adults. Modelling results indicate that there are significant differences in preferences between the two samples. The Swait-Louviere test confirmed that model coefficients were different and that such differences cannot be explained entirely by differences in scale.Analysis of predicted probabilities suggest that there were fewer predicted/observed probabilities around 0.5 in the adult sample, suggesting that adolescents were perhaps less confident in their choices. Discussion/Conclusion: Resultsthat adolescents’ preferences differ from those of adults taking the perspective of a child. It may be that these differences exist due to the relative experience of adults, who might have a better understandingof ill health and its effects. However, a normative argument can be made that adolescents’ preferences should be considered in any decision-making that is directly relevant to them. Whilst the cognitive demands of other valuation methods may have ruled this possibility out, this study provides evidence to suggest that adolescents are capable of completing a DCE.
