According to the World Health Organization (WHO), quality of life is defined as “an individual's perception of their position in life in the context of the culture and value systems in which they live and in relation to their goals, expectations, standards and concerns. It is a broad ranging concept affected in a complex way by the person's physical health, psychological state, personal beliefs, social relationships and their relationship to salient features of their environment.Quality of life measures are obtained from responses provided by subjects to standardized questionnaires. Today there are multiple scales of quality of life related to health: they are considered to be specific if they explore quality of life related to a particular disease, orgeneric if they are common toany condition. Among the existing generic tools, theEuroQolEQ-5Dquestionnaire istoday the most widely used descriptive system of health statesto capture health related quality of life in the world(1,3). Each health state generated by the questionnaire is associated to a so-called “tariff” (or utility value), which reflects its relative value ranging from -1 to 1. These values are then used to assess the outcomes of health products, servicesor programs in cost-effectiveness analyses. Associated to a time spent in a given health state, they yield a number of Quality AdjustedLife Years (QALYs), which are literally the number of life years provided by a given intervention weighted by the quality of life experienced by the beneficiary of the treatment. The EQ-5D questionnaireis adescriptive system of health statesbased on five dimensions, which are considered as being essential: mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression. Each dimensionis reported with three levels of severity (EQ-5D-3L) and more recently with five (EQ-5D-5L). In the 3level questionnaire, respondents can score each dimension on three levels, thus leading to 243health states(plus death, scored 0 by convention). For each health sate a value from -1 (theoretically considered asthe worst possible health state)to 1 (perfect health) is associated, the estimation of which is based on surveys of stated preferences in a representative sample of the population of each country. In France, the valuation of EQ-5D-3L health states was undertaken by the Chair of Health Systems at ESSEC Business School and the French value set is recommendedby the French High Health Authority(HAS)for the submission of cost-effectiveness studies when required by regulation for access to coverage and pricing. (4).The 3 level version of EQ-5D has been considered by many researchers as limited in capturing small differences in health levels for certain conditions. This lack of sensitivity has been the main motivation for the EUROQOL consortium to develop the 5 level version of the EuroQol questionnaire, the EQ-5D-5L. Throughout the development of the 5L, the five dimension of the original EQ-5D-3L are maintained but the number of levels for each dimension was increased to 5 (5). This new version of the questionnaire leads to a total of 3125 health states (55) compared with only 243 from the 3-level previous version. Because of its better accuracy to describe the health values related to a given health state, EQ-5D-5L will now become the reference in the coming years. Indeed, several publications have demonstrated an increased sensitivity of this new version to capture variations in health related quality of life of patients (6-15).
