Background and aims: Climate change is increasingly recognized as a significant public health concern, affecting both physical and mental health worldwide. While extreme weather events such as floods, wildfires, and heatwaves are known to cause psychological distress, including anxiety, guilt, and worry, the link between these psychological responses and health-related quality of life (HRQoL) remains underexplored. This study will investigate the relationship between climate change exposure and psychological responses to climate change, and their impact on health outcomes measured by the EQ-5D-5L, GAD-7, and PHQ-9, using data from the POPulation health impact of the CORoNavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic (POPCORN) study. Additionally, the study will evaluate the known-group validity of the EQ-5D-5L in differentiating between subgroups with varying levels of exposure and psychological responses to climate change. Methods: A cross-sectional secondary data analysis will be conducted using the fourth wave of the POPCORN study, which surveyed 3,572 respondents from the United States, the United Kingdom, Italy, Sweden, the Netherlands, and Greece between May and July 2023. Climate change exposure was assessed through five binary questions capturing personal and vicarious experiences, and psychological responses were measured using six items on a 5-point Likert scale. Health outcomes were assessed using the EQ-5D-5L, GAD-7, and PHQ-9 instruments. Descriptive analysis for the EQ-5D-5L, GAD-7, and PHQ-9 outcomes will be conducted for subgroups with different levels of exposure and different levels of psychological responses. Logistic and linear regression models will be employed to examine the relationships between climate change exposure, and psychological responses, and their impact on the health outcomes, adjusting for socio-demographic factors. Interaction terms will be tested. Known-group validity will be assessed using Cohen's d for effect size and the Kruskal-Wallis test to compare scores across subgroups. Results: The analysis is expected to explore how exposure to climate change impacts psychological responses and how these responses are associated with EQ-5D-5L, GAD-7, and PHQ-9. By analyzing data from six countries, this study will contribute to the understanding of how well the EQ-5D-5L can capture the psychological responses triggered by climate change across diverse populations and assess its validity in distinguishing between different subgroups. Conclusion: This study will help emphasize the relevance of EQ-5D-5L in measuring the health effects of climate change. The findings will inform future research on improving EQ-5D regarding the sensitivity for assessing the public health implications of climate change, while also providing evidence on the known-group validity of EQ-5D-5L, particularly in capturing the mental health effects triggered by climate change.
