Introduction: The EQ-VT protocol uses both cTTO and DCE methods to elicit health preferences. The cTTO method uses a fixed starting point and iterative route, which is susceptible to bias. It requires face-to-face interviews and the quality of the cTTO data can be influenced by the performance of interviewers. An intense quality control (QC) process was introduced in order to obtain high quality values. To develop an easier-to-administer version of TTO method, in this study, we tested two TTO variants, one known as non-stopping TTO (hereafter refereed as nTTO) and the other as open-ended TTO (hereafter refereed as oTTO). This study aimed to compare the performances of these two non-iterative TTO methods with cTTO. A secondary aim of this study was to assess the health preferences between the urban and rural populations in China. Method: A total of 31 EQ-5D-5L states (25 orthogonal array+ 5 mildest + 1 pits) were selected and divided into 2 blocks of 16 health states. We decided to collect 70 observations per state per method. The total sample is 420 as there are 2 blocks of health state and three different methods, i.e., 70 observations * 2 blocks * 3 methods. We recruited 7 undergraduate students from Guizhou Medical University as interviewers. For each method, four quota criteria were set up aiming to recruit a representative sample of China, namely gender, age, education attainment and Hukou (urban/rural). We compared the performance of these three TTO methods in terms of value distribution, logical inconsistency, feasibility and their modelling performance. To explore the preference differences, we combined the data of this study with another study to boost statistics power. Both univariate and multivariate linear regression analyses with TTO values as the dependent variable were used to examine the differences in mean health state valuations between urban and rural participants. A 20-parameter main effects model with 20 interaction terms differentiating urban and rural participants were also estimated. Results: The data collection was conducted between September 2019 and September 2020 in Guizhou Province, China. The final sample size was 422. On average, the time spent for completing the 3 practices was 2 to 3 minutes faster when used the nTTO and oTTO method, with oTTO being the fastest one. Similarly, both non-iterative methods needed less time in the formal valuation tasks and the cumulative time reduction for the whole interview (practice + real task) was around 10 minutes. In terms of logical inconsistency, both TTO variants showed higher inconsistency frequency, but similar severe inconsistency frequency compared with cTTO. Both variants produced an overall mean value close to cTTO method, with nTTO the lowest among three methods (0.222) and oTTO the highest (0.266), but the mean values were not statistically different. cTTO model performed better than the models of two non-iterative TTO methods. Both univariate and multivariable linear regression analyses showed that rural participants tended to value health states lower than urban participants regardless of severity of health states. The unadjusted and adjusted overall mean differences between the two groups were -0.041 (95% confidence interval [CI] -0.077, -0.004, p-value=0.031) and -0.040 (95% CI -0.078, -0.002, p-value=0.038), respectively. Discussion: Overall, both TTO methods demonstrated potential in valuing health states, even though their data distributions and modelling performance were inferior to the cTTO method. A clear advantage of both methods is the less time needed for completing the wheelchair examples and practice states, and completing the formal EQ-5D-5L states valuation. This suggests the higher feasibility of these two methods. In addition, the mean values obtained, the percentage of negative values and the value range obtained through the three methods were not statistically different. In terms of preference differences between urban and rural populations in China, there were small, yet statistically significant, differences in EQ-5D-5L health state preferences.
