Over the last few years there has been discussion within the EuroQol Group about the development of condition specific "bolt-ons" to the standard EQ-5D. Bolt-ons are extensions of the standard five dimension instrument, implying that a dimension or multiple dimensions will be added to the EQ-5D as to broaden the coverage of the health measurement continuum. Bolt-ons can be of substantial scientific and strategicinterest to the EuroQol group. There are several reasons for this interest. The most obvious and arguablymost important reason is user demand. Disease specific utility measures have begun to be developed and published in the literature. Also, agencies outside the EuroQol group are interested in funding research in this area. From a scientific point of view there are further grounds for exploring the development of condition specific bolt-ons to the EQ-5D. There is evidence that the EQ-5D does not capture all possible variations in disability caused by various conditions, in areas such as cognition (Krabbe et al, 1999), vision or hearing loss, (Espallargues et al, 2005; Brazier et al 2004), but also sexual function, incontinence or changes in someone’s appearance (Kaarlola et al, 2004). Two recent studies by Pickard and Lin (2010) and Solem et al (2011) show a number of condition areas where developingbolt-ons to the EQ-5D could be justified.Moreover, more and more so-called ‘mapping’algorithms to the EQ-5D are being used that are based on a link function between the EQ-5D and a condition specific non-preference based measure, often by means of a simple regression on the index values. Two recent review studies showed that many of these mappings are of very poor quality (Brazier et al, 2010, Mortimer et al, 2008), but the increasing use of these mappingsindicates that there is an interest for index values for extensions to the EQ-5D.There are two known studies that can be seen as initial bolt-on endeavours. The first is the addition of a cognitive dimension (Krabbe et al, 1999) and the second a sleep dimension (Yang et al, 2008). Both were not condition specific. In the cognition study valuations were performed and showed systematically different values compared to the standard EQ-5D, whereas content validity improved. It was concluded that the addition of the cognition dimension was justified. The secondbolt-on valuation study showed that the sleep dimension had no significant incremental disutility and therefore adding a sleep dimension to the EQ-5D was discouraged. Two recent studies aimed at the development of bolt-ons to the EQ-5Din the areas of vision and psoriasis (Yang et al, 2012; Swinburn et al, 2012). Vision had a significant impact on the EQ-5D-3L although differences between the EQ-5D-3L states and the corresponding states including the Vision dimension were not significant. Two psoriasis related dimensions (Skin irritation and Self-confidence)had a significant impact on the EQ-5D-5L.
