Background: The EQ-Health and Wellbeing (EQ-HWB) is a newly developed generic instrument that assessed the impacts of health, social care and being an informal carer on quality of life. Evidence had emerged on the validity of the long and short versions of the instrument (EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-9) in different populations and languages. Most of the 25 items have been found to be understood but there was evidence that improvements could be made. This led to proposals to modify items and response options. It was important to establish whether the modifications worked as intended and were better and no worse than the current versions; therefore, the aim of this study was to assess the validity of the modifications. The study also aimed to develop a protocol for testing modifications that could support testing of the modifications in international studies with the same aim.Methods: Content validity studies aim to assess the comprehensiveness, relevance and comprehensibility of measures and were therefore suited to assessing whether the modifications were comprehensible. Concurrent think aloud interviews withretrospective probing were undertaken to assess understanding of the modified items using a protocol for assessing modifications and topic guide developed as part of the study. A mixed population of patients was recruited from an online panel to take part in video conferencing interviews. Interviews were video recorded and transcribed. All interviews were coded using the framework adapted from an existing content validity framework with dual coding for 20% of the interviews. A matrix with participant quotes and codes was created. Thematic analysis was used to summarise whether the modifications were better or no worse than the current versions of the EQ-HWB instruments.Results: This study generated evidence on the impact of modifications for the English source version of the Experimental EQ-HWB-9 and the EQ-HWB. The study also generated a study protocol that was adapted and replicated in other studies testing the EQ-HWB modifications.
