BACKGROUND: There is an increasing growth of interest in the development of generic preference-based measures specific to children and adolescents in the last decades. The EQ-5D-Y-3L is a generic instrument developed by the EuroQol Group to measure health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in children and adolescents aged 8-15 years old. However, there is not an EQ-5D-Y-5L value set to estimate utility values in economic evaluations conducted for Brazilian children and adolescents. This study aims to cover this gap by following the International Valuation Protocol for the EQ-5D-Y-3L. This study aims at covering this gap by collecting preferences using a standardised protocol for deriving EQ-5D-Y-3L value sets. METHODS: Two independent sample of adults were recruited to the online discrete choice experiment and the face-to-face composite time trade-off by computer-assisted. Respondents completed the DCE (each respondent completed 15 pairs of the 150 pairs) and cTTO (each respondent completed 10 health states of the 28 health states) tasks considering your views for a 10-year-old child. The discrete choice experiment responses were analysed using a mixed-logit model. The discrete choice experiments values were mapped onto the mean observed composite time trade-off values to generate an EQ-5D-Y-3Lvalue set. Linear and non-linear mapping models were explored to estimate the most efficient model to generate this value set. RESULTS: Overall, 1,152 and 211 respondents completed the discrete choice experiment and composite time trade-off, respectively. The order the importance of each domain was pain/discomfort, followed by mobility, self-care, usual activities, and anxiety/depression. Furthermore, the final model ranged from 1 for “full health” (11111) to − 0.0059 for “the worst health state” (33333), which was the only negative utility value of the whole elicited value set. CONCLUSION: This study estimated the Brazilian EQ-5D-Y-3L value set, which can be used to estimate quality-adjusted life years in economic evaluations of healthcare interventions for Brazilian youth population. The linear mapping without intercept was the best model to generate a consistent value set for Brazilian youth.
