n the Brazilian Public Health System, recommendations for the coverage and reimbursement of new medicines, devices, or equipment are centralized in a committee (National Commission for Technology Incorporation in the Unified Health System). To be approved, the claimant must provide health technology assessments (HTAs). These include measures of safety, efficacy, effectiveness, and cost-effectiveness to substantiate the decision-making process. There is no restriction on the type of economic model that can be submitted for review. The recommendations are presented as legal documents and economic analysis guidelines.2 This document discusses focus on the possibilities of the utility measures, without any reference to sources or methods or the selection of the best evidence for utility parameters. Health insurance plans in the private sector have a similar process through an independent agency (National Regulatory Agency for Private Health Insurance and Plans) that is responsible for defining a mandatory list of procedures and medicines to be included in all plans. Brazilian preference research was sparse in both the public and private sectors. In this context, utility is a concept adopted from economics that refers to preferences for a specific health state or outcome. This preference (or weight) is usually based on a large group of people representing the general population. Utility is a proxy of quality of life and reflects the preferences of individuals or society for any particular set of health outcomes. Utility expresses the health-related quality of life (HRQOL) in a single value scored on a scale anchored on 1 = “full health” and 0 = “death,” usually derived from “off-the-shelf” preference-based measures such as the EQ- 5D questionnaire. Some health states may be considered worse than death and given negative utility estimates.Utilities are used for informing cost–utility models and can sometimes be obtained from different sources; it is important to create a hierarchy when multiple estimates are available. In a cost–utility analysis, competing health technologies are compared in terms of their cost per “year in full health.” The quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) is one such widely used measure that combines a person’s life expectancy and the value of their HRQOL in a single estimate. The HRQOL can be expressed in utilities for economic analysis. It is important to distinguish between the utility weights and the profiles or health states. The measurement process using multiattribute instruments starts by asking for a description of individual health states, called profiles. The selected profiles are converted to utilities compared with a table called the value set, which contains weights for each profile. These weights are usually collected from the general population (valuation process) and represent preferences for each possible health state. In one Brazilian state, in 2011, value set was developed for the Short-Form Six-Dimension (SF-6D) instrument.9 For 3-level version of EQ-5D (EQ-5D-3L), the value set was developed nationally in 2013.10 Nonetheless, in the Brazilian HTA ecosystem, utility estimates based on Brazilian samples are limited. Considerations of the source and type of utility values are especially important in a modeling context, in which the lack of transparency, including the lack of a hierarchy for utility data sources, is a major issue for any estimation and could compromise model reliability. The absence of clear guidelines permits flawed modeling practices, given that an ad hoc evidence selection can result in cherry picking. An extreme example of this practice would be feeding a model with data to uphold the owner’s perspective, creating a false favorable impression of a particular technology. In recent years, the process of decision-making using cost–utility data in Brazil has improved. Because of the lack of confidence in some economic models, the cost–utility models have a mixed impact on real-world judgments. Transparently built models can hopefully support better decisions for the rational use of health resources. Few international guidelines discuss how to select the best utility data from different perspectives in the Brazilian context. This document aims to present the first version of the Brazilian guidelines for a utility measurement supporting an economic analysis. A glossary of technical terms was created. As an initial step, a rapid review of the literature was conducted on July 6, 2020, based on an adapted search strategy from MEDLINE,EMBASE, and LILACS databases and the websites of The University of Sheffield, the Decision Support Unit of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), and the EuroQol Group. Additional individual search strategies were adapted for each recommendation to gather the main recommendations and debates previously published on utility measurement issues for economic analyses. Approximately 110 documents were reviewed. The experts were selected based on their previous experience with utility measurement instruments or economic models. The the external reviewer was selected for his experience with both topics. Another important criterion was to be a manager or member of the 2 incorporated sectors in Brazil: public health (Brazilian Public Health System) and insurance plans (National Regulatory Agency for Private Health Insurance and Plans). The review results were synthesized in a brief report. Then, in October 2020, these findings were discussed during a 5-hour online workshop, in which 5 lectures were presented by international speakers followed by debates. The complete program is available in the attached material. The expert group included a wide range of stakeholders—including government representatives, industry, academic groups, international guests, and a patient representative—and regulatory agencies, including the private health sector An adapted Delphi panel technique with 4 iterations was adopted for the construction of the final report. The draft report was sent to representatives, who used it to write the final report and who are listed here as coauthors. The recommendations are based on the proposal with the most approvals, but controversial topics are included in the recommendation or discussion. The text includes the rationale for the final decision
