Title: Are there any challenges in valuing Y-5L arising from the descriptive system? A multi-country study Psychometric evidence suggests some improved measurement properties of the EQ-5D-Y-5L (Y-5L) compared to the EQ-5D-Y-3L (Y-3L). In the same way that the EQ-5D-5L is considered to be the “flagship” instrument for measurement and valuation of health for adults, a similar role is possible for the Y-5L in paediatric populations. The Y-5L is planned to be launched as an approved instrument in 2024. However, to date no research has been undertaken to test the valuation of the expanded Y-5L descriptive system. The aim of this project was to (a) identify whether the descriptive system for the Y-5L presents any problems when states from it are presented in valuation tasks (e.g., preference reversals in severity levels); (b) establish the feasibility of eliciting stated preferences for the Y-5L from both adult and adolescent members of the general public; and (c) undertake initial exploration of the characteristics of stated preferences for the Y-5L across countries, with a focus on the implications of results for the descriptive system. The study was conducted among adults and adolescents from five countries: Australia, Canada, China, Netherlands and Spain, using DCE and response scaling tasks. Target samples included n = 1000 adults (>18 years) and n = 1000 adolescents (12-17 years) in each country, recruited from multiple panels via a market research company ‘Cint’. In the DCE tasks, adults used a 10-year-old perspective, and adolescents used their own perspective. Respondents undertook two response scaling tasks after the DCE, to arrange the labels for the Y-5L and Y-3L (for just one dimension, randomly assigned) on a VAS, to indicate their perceived level of severity. Results showed that, overall, adults can mostly interpret the level labels in their intended order of severity, and results were in general consistent from DCE tasks. We did not find statistically significant positive coefficients (i.e. ‘misorderings’ of coefficients) from DCE tasks, suggesting it is unlikely that the current descriptive system for the Y-5L presents problems when states from it are presented in valuation tasks using DCE without duration. However, we observed a few cases in which coefficients were negative but statistically insignificant in the DCE modelling results. These were found for moving between level 2 and level 3, on the first four dimensions of the Y-5L in Canada, Australia, China and the Netherlands, but not in the Spanish version. Response inconsistency based on the response scaling task analysis was more prevalent in adolescents compared to adults in all countries except for China. However, the overall patterns in dimension importance were broadly similar between adults and adolescents within each country: PD had the largest DCE decrement in all countries except China; SC and UA had the smallest decrements in all five countries. Adolescents valued MO as more important compared to adults. Our findings highlight further research on the best approach to value Y-5L is needed, and to explore the feasibility of eliciting adolescents’ preferences using different valuation methods, given the challenges in recruiting adolescents online and the increasing prevalence of fraudulent data in online, self-completion administration of valuation tasks.
