This US valuation study for the EQ-5D-Y-3L was kicked off during early 2022 upon grant approval. It was designed as a two-phased study with Phase I being the US stakeholder engagement and Phase II the valuation task. IRB was immediately secured from the University of San Francisco (#1780). Stakeholder meeting was designed, organized and then executed on April 7th, 2022. Subsequently, the stakeholder meeting paper was published in Pharmacoeconomics in December 2022. Phase II valuation design adopted US stakeholders’ recommendations for including children directly in the study. The DCE design followed the International Protocol but collected preference data from both adolescents and adults. We compared and analyzed adults’ and adolescents’ DCE data descriptively and quantitatively. The descriptive comparison of the adults and adolescents’ data was presented at the EuroQol Academy meeting in Milan (March 2023) as a paper presentation. Findings suggested that adolescents had more dominant pair violations, especially for younger adolescents aged 11-14 years. Hence, among other traits, QC violations could be reduced by including older adolescents (age 14-17). Quantitative comparison between adults and adolescents were conducted using latent class analyses (LCA). Findings from the LCA suggested that adolescents tended to contribute weaker and less informative preferences, resulting a lower contribution to an estimated value set should their responses to be combined with those from adults. The LCA findings were presented as paper at EuroQol 40th Plenary meeting in Rome (September 2023) and as poster at ISPOR EU 2023 in Copenhagen (November 2023). The final value set used a combined adult/adolescent model, weighted based on census data to represent the US population by age category and sex. Estimated utilities for state 33333 to 12111 ranged from 0.00-0.97. Pain/discomfort was the most important dimension for the youth in the US, followed by feeling worried/sad/unhappy. The final value set will be presented at ISPOR US 2024 and the manuscript is currently being developed.
