Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) is a common complication of diabetes that can cause vision impairment and blindness. The health-related quality of life (HRQoL) of people living with DR is substantially reduced, yet evidence shows that generic HRQoL instruments such as the EQ-5D may not be sufficiently responsive in this population. Previous studies have demonstrated that EQ-5D often fails to discriminate across DR severity and can produce counterintuitive results. EuroQol Group has developed the Bolt-on Toolbox, which is designed to enhance the responsiveness and sensitivity of the EQ-5D across a range of health conditions, including those that affect vision. This study aims to explore the content validity of vision bolt-ons in the context of diabetic retinopathy, assessing whether they improve the EQ-5D’s responsiveness and identifying which version(s) offer the most meaningful measurement properties from the perspective of people living with DR.The study will adopt a qualitative design using 25 semi-structured online interviews with individuals diagnosed with DR. This sample is intended to provide at least five participants for each type of DR: (1) non-proliferative (early stage) and (2) proliferative (advanced stage).Interviews will follow a think-aloud protocol with some cognitive debriefing. All interviews, conducted via MS Teams, will be transcribed, coded, and analysed using framework analysis developed by van Leeuwen et al., which has previously been applied in studies using think-aloud methods to test the validity of EQ-5D-5L.The purpose of this study is to establish a foundation for a prospective psychometric property analysis of the vision bolt-on. The research team plans to develop a proposal for this subsequent study, targeting the 21 EuroQol Request for Proposals (RFP). No need for citations in the abstract unless they’re really crucial. Think-aloud (on its own) is generally seen as being insufficient because participants struggle to fully articulate everything that we want to know during the process of completion. It is best to combine the think-aloud protocol with some cognitive debriefing.
