The EQ-5DY-5L joins a suite of EQ-5D instruments that measure and value a person’s health related quality of life (HRQoL) from ‘cradle to grave’. However, if the EQ-5D instruments are to be used to measure and value health across a person’s lifespan, it is important to understand how differences in EQ-5D instruments affect both measurement and valuation of HRQoL. This is particularly important for use of EQ-5D instruments for health technology assessment.  A key difference between the EQ-5D-Y/-Y-5L and the EQ-5D-3L/5L is the conceptualisation and description of the mental health dimension, which uses ‘Feeling worried, sad or unhappy’ in the paediatric Y/Y-5L instruments rather than ‘Anxiety/Depression’, as in the adult 3L/5L instruments. There is evidence that respondents report more problems for the mental health dimension when ‘feeling worried, sad or unhappy’ is used. The impact on valuation of using different descriptions for the mental health dimension across the EQ-5D-Y-5L and the EQ-5D-5L has yet to be tested. This study addresses this gap by comparing these descriptors in the valuation context using discrete choice experiment methods. There will be 4 arms in total. Respondents will be assigned to complete DCE choice tasks for either the EQ-5D-5L or the EQ-5D-Y-5L. However, they will see some DCE choice tasks where the mental health dimension is swapped. Thus, respondents assigned to the EQ-5D-Y-5L will see some choice tasks where the mental health dimension from the EQ-5D-5L (i.e. anxiety/depression) replaces the usual ‘feeling worried, sad or unhappy’, and for respondents assigned to the EQ-5D-5L will seem some choice sets that use ‘feeling worried, sad or unhappy’ rather than anxiety/depression. Results from this study will support EuroQol’s goals to provide guidance to users by improving understanding of the transitions between age specific EQ-5D instruments, and to promote the integration of EQ-5D instruments as a way to measure and value health across the lifespan.
