Background: Hundreds of standardised instruments have been developed to measure health-related quality of life and health status, with a range of approaches used in the development. The EuroQol Group are currently exploring the potential for developing a new descriptive system. A key part of the process of this development will require the selection of items for inclusion in the instrument. Various methods for item selection are available and the Group will need to decide which to adopt in the development of any future EQ instrument. The aim of this study was to provide a contemporary overview of methods recommended in guidelines for item selection in instrument development and methods used by instrument developers. Method:A focused review of key standards and guidelines was used to identify recommended methods and psychometric evaluations. A systematic review of the literature was conducted to identify the methods actually used in empirical studies reporting development processes of descriptive systems and any additional methods not included in the guidelines. The search was conducted using COSMIN’s precise search filter for measurement properties, restricted to include health related quality of life studies and focusing on development of descriptive systems, and a total of 553 abstracts were identified. Supplementary searches were conducted by reviewing bibliographies and citations of the included studies to identify complete set of articles on development of the descriptive system where possible.Results: A total ofeleven guidance documents were consulted and a data extraction template was created. A total of 61 full text articles were included. Item generation involved three approaches: developing items de novo, identifying items from several existing measures or using a single measure to derive a short form measure. Item selection was determined by the instrument developers in few cases, but most reported use of empirical work. The guidelines describe two development phases after item generation: pretesting and field-testing of questionnaire but this was not always followed. Some studies determined items based on relevance and importance, assessed from interviews and rating studies. The most common approach was to apply statistical analyses to datasets containing completed questionnaires. Three general types of statistical models were applied: regression analysis, factor analytic techniques and item response theory models. These measurement models were used to establish construct validity, however in most cases further hypothesis testing was carried out to assess known group, convergent and divergent validity. The majority used a combination of statistical methods; with exploratory factor analysis and item response theory being the most common. Psychometric criteriaincluded descriptive statistics of the responses such as missing values, range and distribution of responses and internal consistency.Discussion: The methods used to identify items were similar across studies but differed considerably for item selection.Construct validity and internal consistency was assessed in most of the studies, but few instrument developers relied completely on content validity. Few of the statistical methods identified are interchangeable in terms of purpose, but may generate very different instruments. The developers seldom explained why one statistical model was chosen over another
