Objective: The first aim was to test the feasibility of using time trade-off (cTTO) and discrete choice experiment (DCE) administered using the EuroQol Valuation Technology research protocol to derive utilities for the EQ-HWB-S. The second aim was to review the acceptability of the new measure for decision-making with informed members fo the public. Methods: EQ-HWB-S utilities were elicited using cTTO and DCE tasks with adaptations to fit the new measure. Participants (target n=600) from the UK general population were sampled based on age, sex and ethnicity. Interviews were undertaken using video-conferencing. Quality control (QC) steps were used to assess interviewers’ performance throughout the study. Data were modelled using linear, Tobit, probit and hybrid models. Feasibility was assessed based on the evaluation of the distribution of cTTO data, QC assessment and regression modelling results. Regression results were assessed based on theoretical considerations, monotonicity and statistical significance. For the second aim, members of the NICE Public Involvement Programme Expert Panel were invited to participate, with volunteers selected to represent varying age, gender, health and caring responsibilities. To familiarise the group with the measure and the source of the weights, each person completed a valuation interview (time trade-off (TTO) and discrete choice experiment (DCE)). This was followed by a cognitive debrief and information giving group session, where the weights from the feasibility valuation study were presented. Two subsequent separate focus groups obtained views regarding the measure, the utility weights, the sample (including exclusions) and the methods used. All sessions took place online. Focus groups were recorded, transcribed, and analysed using a framework approach. Results: There were 521 participants who provided cTTO and DCE data. The demographic characteristics were broadly representative of the UK general population although participants were more educated and there were slightly more females. Interviewers met QC requirements. cTTO values ranged between -1 to 1 with increasing disutility associated with more severe states. The hybrid Tobit heteroscedastic model had values ranging from -0.384 to 1. Pain, mobility, daily activities, sad/depressed had the largest disutilities followed by loneliness, anxiety, exhaustion, control and cognition in this model. Twelve people (50% female, aged 28-74) completed the interviews and nine attended the focus groups to assess feasibility. EQ-HWB-S was viewed positively due to the inclusion of dimensions such as exhaustion and loneliness. Some missing dimensions were identified (e.g. coping, sleep), but existing dimensions were considered to cover some of these (e.g. sleep covered by exhaustion). There was surprise at the small utility decrements for anxiety, control and exhaustion relative to other dimensions. Weights were seen as reflecting societal norms, respondent experience or knowledge, the composition of the sample and the interpretation of items. There were concerns that the valuation survey sample was not diverse or large enough to adequately represent the values of those who would be impacted by decisions based on EQ-HWB-S. Participants only supported data exclusions where it could be evidenced by multiple sources that the respondent did not understand or fully engage in the exercise. Other exclusions were considered problematic either because the data could reflect true preferences or for ethical reasons. DCE was preferred to TTO, but participants suggested TTO could be improved by providing more background information, different practice states, particularly the wheelchair state, and offering post-survey debriefs.
