Background: Several factors influencing the Time Trade-off (TTO) health measure are known. In TTO studies, respondents report thoughts related to death. According to Terror Management Theory (TMT), mortality awareness gives rise to anxiety and increases death thought accessibility (DTA), which can be mitigated by secure attachment. This explorative study aims to find additional factors influencing the TTO and Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) health measures. Based on TMT, the role of DTA and attachment is explored. Research questions: 1) Does DTA occur in TTO and VAS methods, 2) How are DTA and attachment related to TTO and VAS measures. We hypothesize that 1) DTA is higher when respondents are confronted with TTO or VAS measures and, 2) TTO scores are higher in those with a better attachment style. Methods: In an online experiment, members of the general public were randomised to one of four conditions: 1) TTO, 2) VAS, 3) Mortality Salient (MS), and 4) control. In conditions 1 and 2, TTO and VAS valuation methods were used to obtain scores for a hypothetical wheelchair health state, and for self-experienced health. The MS and control conditions served as manipulation checks. ANOVAs were performed to compare the four conditions, correcting for multiple comparisons. Pearson’s correlations were used to assess the relationship between TTO/VAS and DTA/attachment. Results: 4572 respondents were included. The MS condition showed elevated DTA. Unexpectedly, DTA levels in the TTO condition tended to be lower than in the control condition. Associations between DTA and TTO were absent. Associations between DTA and VAS scores were negative for the wheelchair health state (p < .013), and for self-experienced health (p < .005). Attachment was associated with the health measures for self-experienced health (TTO and VAS, p < 0.001), but not with scores for the hypothetical wheelchair state. Conclusion: DTA emerged as a novel factor influencing hypothetical and self-experienced VAS scores. Attachment was identified as a novel factor influencing self-experienced TTO and VAS scores. All associations were weak in the order of -0.15. Unexpectedly, the DTA in the TTO condition tended to be lower than in the control condition. Reasons for these results are discussed.
