Background: Despite the growing availability of obesity treatments and the rise in related clinical trials, significant gaps remain in how health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is routinely measured using patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs). Existing instruments are costly, lengthy, or impractical for routine use. A more feasible, sensitive, and cost-effective PROM is needed for long-term HRQoL monitoring in obesity care and research. There is increasing demand for HRQoL measures that can support cost-utility analysis (CUA) in obesity; however, widely used tools, including the EQ-5D, may lack the content validity needed to fully capture the impact of obesity and its treatments.  One potential way is to include additional dimensions (‘bolt-ons’) that are related to obesity to be used together with EQ-5D-5L. We identified twelve potential bolt-on candidates in a previous qualitative study: breathing, sleep, tiredness, physical appearance, intimate relationship, discrimination / humiliation, social activities, self-confidence, burden to others, diet control, food enjoyment, gastrointestinal problems. Of these twelve bolt-on candidates, some have been shortlisted for the Experimental Bolt-on Toolbox (i.e. breathing problems, sleep, tiredness, self-confidence). Meanwhile, the newly developed 9-item EQ-HWB-S might also be more suitable than EQ-5D for measuring HRQoL of obese individuals as obesity is a multifaceted issue that affect both health and psychological well-beings.  Aims: The primary objective of this proposal is to evaluate the psychometric properties of the different versions of four bolt-ons in the experimental toolbox (breathing, sleep, fatigue, self-confidence), EQ-HWB-25, and EQ-HWB-9. The secondary objective of this proposal is to evaluate the psychometric performance of eight bolt-on items (physical appearance, intimate relationship, discrimination / humiliation, social activities, burden to others, diet control, food enjoyment, gastrointestinal problems) in individuals with obesity. The specific objectives are: To assess the psychometric performance of the different versions offour bolt-ons; To assess and compare the psychometric performance of EQ-HWB-25 and EQ-HWB-9 among individuals with obesity; andTo explore dimensionality underlying EQ-5D and bolt-ons using exploratory factor analysis and to assess the validity of the resulting scores. Methods: The study will recruit 150 adults (aged 21 years or above) with obesity defined by Asian BMI cut-off (BMI ≥37.5 kg/m2 or BMI ≥32.5 kg/m2 with an obesity-related health condition) who seek weight loss treatment (lifestyle modification, pharmacotherapy, or bariatric surgery) at the National University Hospital (NUH) and Alexandra Hospital (AH). Data will be collected from the participants at three time points: Baseline, 1 week after baseline, and 6 months after baseline. The baseline questionnaire will be answered when the participant visits the clinic and will include EQ-5D-5L with bolt-ons, EQ-HWB-25, and other disease-specific HRQoL instruments (6 subscales from BODY-Q, IWQoL-Lite, the subjective sleep quality question from PSQI). A link of the follow-up questionnaires that include EQ-5D-5L with bolt-ons and EQ-HWB-25 will be sent to the participant via their preferred contact method. Statistical analysis will be used to assess the distributional characteristics, divergent validity, convergent validity, known-groups validity, test-retest reliability, and responsiveness of the bolt-on items and EQ-HWB-25. In addition, we will explore potential non-preference-based scoring method of the bolt-ons using exploratory factor analysis.
