Objectives: The EuroQol Health and Wellbeing Questionnaire (EQ-HWB) is a generic instrument designed to measure health and wellbeing in diverse populations, including patients, social care users, and informal caregivers. Its short version (EQ-HWB-S), comprising nine items, was developed to suit valuation endeavors. The initial “Experimental” version has undergone minor adjustments, resulting in a “Modified” version. This study aimed to assess the content validity of the Spanish (Argentina) modified version of the EQ-HWB-S in a sample of patients, social care users, and informal carers, as well as inform whether the modifications are understood or preferred by the target population. Additionally, we aimed to evaluate the comprehension of the frequency scale in the EQHWB-S, which is also used by other Euroqol instruments. Methods: This was a qualitative study employing cognitive interviews. Participants were recruited through purposive sampling strategies. Interviews were conducted face-to-face, or via video conferencing. Trained qualitative researchers used a semi-structured interview guide with open-ended questions and targeted probes. Participants were asked to complete the questionnaires and verbalize their thoughts. Moreover, we included a card-sorting exercise that aimed to explore how the participants understand and order the frequency scale options, and to assess both the conceptual equivalence and preferences in the wording used in the modified version compared to the experimental version. Content analysis was conducted using a framework adapted for face validity studies, supported by data extraction matrices. The protocol was approved by a local Institutional Review Board (IRB) in Buenos Aires, Argentina, and participants provided verbal informed consent to participate. Results: A total of 20 participants were included, comprising patients (n= 11), informal carers (n= 3), and members of the general public (n= 4). From them, 9 were social care users. The median age was 64.5 years (range 25–88); 12 participants were women. Seventeen interviews were conducted face-to-face, and three were held via video conferencing. Content validity was summarized into the following themes: comprehension, interpretation, acceptability, relevance, response options, and exhaustiveness. Participants generally found the questionnaire easy to understand. Items were deemed relevant, and the response options were considered appropriate. Regarding exhaustiveness, some participants noted the absence of questions addressing leisure activities, social interactions, or close relationships. Additionally, participant feedback suggested revising the item related to self-control to enhance its clarity and relevance. The findings do not show a clear preference for how the questions are formulated between the experimental and modified versions. The modified version was considered appropriate. Regarding the frequency scale exercise, the modified version seems to be appropriate. Most participants located “never” and “most or all of the time” at the extremes as expected. There was somewhat more item misplacing in the intermediate labels (for example reversing the order of “a little of the time” and ‘sometimes’). Conclusion: This study shows the content validity of the modified Argentine version of the EQ-HWB-S for measuring health and wellbeing in a mixed population, including patients, social care users, and informal caregivers. In the majority of participants the modified frequency scale exercise did not reveal major wording or comprehension issues. No clear preference emerged between the experimental and modified versions assessment. These findings will support the use of the modified version in diverse contexts within Argentina and contribute to the increasing evidence base of the EQ-HWB-S.
