Background: There is no clear guidance as to how mixed methods psychometric approaches should be used to assess instruments with characteristics common to the EQ suite, such as descriptive systems measuring multiple dimensions and their associated value sets, and bolt-on dimensions. Discussions between the Descriptive System, Youth and EQ-HWB Working Groups highlighted this lack of guidance as a major gap for moving instruments forward. This is also recognized in the strategic plan, where a key objective is to “Support and encourage good practice in the analysis of EQ instruments’ data”.  Aims: This program of work aims to develop EuroQol guidance for testing psychometric properties of generic preference instruments. This includes two documents:  Guidelines for the use of qualitative methods for the testing of EuroQol instruments and modifications. Guidelines for the use of quantitative methods for the testing of EuroQol instruments and modifications  Methods: The program is organized into three complementary work packages (WP) that will inform the development of the psychometric guidance documents.  The three WPs are:  Work package 1 – Critical assessment of existing guidelines and literature A targeted review of the literature will be conducted to summarize existing guidelines for the psychometric analysis of patient reported outcome measures. The data extracted will be used to critically assess and synthesise the guidelines identified, and how they pertain to the analysis of GPBMs. This will be done using objective assessment of what the guidelines include and how they compare and differ, and subjective assessment of the strengths and weakness of the guidelines, the feasibility of the guidelines for GPBMs and any gaps for the assessment of GPBMs.  Learnings from this review will be triangulated with findings of a review of validation studies (1818-RA), which was conceive as part of this program of work.  Work Package 2 - Empirical comparison of methods for testing the EuroQol Suite of instruments We will empirically compare quantitative psychometric methods for testing EQ instruments. We will focus on issues specific to the EQ suite of instruments. We will conduct all analyses on the same datasets. These datasets include the EQ suite of instruments (EQ-5D-5L, EQ-HWB, EQ-5D-Y-5L and bolt ons) alongside other non EQ instruments.  Examples of methods that will be applied include classical test theory, dimensionality assessment, Rasch analysis and item response theory. We will also compare approaches within each set of analyses, with a focus on CTT.  Work Package 3 - Development of psychometric guidance documents for the EuroQol Group We will develop guidance for testing EuroQol instruments and their possible modifications, through consensus based technique (Dephi). Responders will be the project team, other key EQ members, and non-members experts in psychometrics and in generic preference based measures. Responders will be presented a series of statements and will be asked to respond to them through open and closed ended questions. The objective will be to reach consensus on a final list of recommendations, through iterative rounds.
