Background and objective The use of EQ-5D-5L has been demonstrated capable and reliable of rejecting the health-related quality of life (HRQoL) of orthopaedic paediatric patients including those with idiopathic scoliosis. However, with the development of EQ-5D-Y-5L (Y5L) being more appropriate for children and young adolescents, currently there is a lack of an interim step for the transition from the adult form of EQ-5D-5L to the use of Y5L before Y5L can be well-established in multiple specialties of medicine. Proposed methods This is a mapping study of EQ-5D-5L and Y5L in the population of orthopaedic paediatric patients in Hong Kong. Specific conditions of interests include scoliosis, leg or limb length discrepancy, developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH), and any orthopaedic fractures from trauma leading to consultation visits at the orthopaedic specialist clinics or being admitted to the orthopaedic wards. Patients must be 12 to 18 years of age. This study aims to establish prediction models for mapping EQ-5D-5L onto Y5L with adjustment for patient demographic and clinical characteristics in these orthopaedic paediatric patients. We propose to recruit patients in the orthopaedic specialist clinics and orthopaedic wards using quota sampling, based on treatment modality of initiation of treatment or pre-operation as compared to regular follow-up or observation only to obtain sufficient number of patients with severe, moderate or mild health state in the study population. Patients are asked to fill in the following questionnaires at the same visit: EQ-5D-5L, Y5L, Paediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL) 4.0 generic core scales and disease-specific Scoliosis-Research Society-22 items refined (SRS-22r) questionnaire for patients with scoliosis and Oxford Hip Score for patients with DDH. EQ-5D-5L and Y5L will each be tested for its relationship with PedsQL 4.0 and with disease-specific measures via correlation tests. The strength of correlation with other questionnaires will then be compared between EQ-5D-5L versus Y5L. The agreement of each dimension and index score of EQ-5D-5L and Y5L will also be examined. Prediction models for mapping of EQ-5D-5L and Y5L will be established using the response mapping method. Multiple mapping functions will be built through Bayesian networks and least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) regression, and these models will be compared before deriving the response mapping table and algorithm with best model performance for the Y5L conversion from EQ-5D-5L dimension responses. We will also use the adult EQ-5D-5L Hong Kong value set for estimating the utility scores from both the EQ-5D-Y-5L and EQ-5D-5L responses. Continuous mapping models between Y-5L utility scores and adult -5L utility scores will be established. It is expected such converting algorithm will be useful for clinical use of transferring previously captured HRQoL in EQ-5D-5L into Y5L from retrospective data, which can be compared with future assessment using the Y5L.
