Objectives: Few previous studies reported significant associations between EQ-5D responses and different psychological characteristics, such as personality, locus of control and optimism. Time perspective (TP) is a psychological construct that describes how one subjectively focuses on the past, present and future. TP has been found to be associated with several health-related behaviours, including healthy eating, smoking and adherence to medications. It is possible that two people with different psychological traits and the same health status rate their health differently, which is commonly referred to as response heterogeneity. Cut-point shift, a form of response heterogeneity, occurs if certain subgroups of respondents use systematically different category thresholds when self-reporting health. In this study, we aim to examine the associations of TP profile with self-reported health on the EQ-5D and to detect which EQ-5D domains display cut-point shift for TP. Methods: We conducted a secondary analysis of EQ-5D-5L data from a representative general population sample in Hungary (n=996). The 17-item Zimbardo Time Perspective Inventory was used to measure individuals' TP on five subscales: past-negative (PN), past-positive (PP), present-fatalist (PF), present-hedonist (PH) and future (F). The associations between TP subscales and EQ-5D-5L domain scores were analysed by using partial proportional odds models adjusting for socio-demographic (age, gender, education, income) and health status (12 chronic health conditions). We used an iterative procedure to allow the parallel-lines constraint to be relaxed for those TP subscales that drive response heterogeneity. The results are reported in odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. The associations between TP subscales and EQ VAS and EQ-5D-5L index scores were analysed by multivariate linear regressions adjusting for socio-demographic and health status. Results: Respondents that scored higher on the PN and PF and lower on the PH and F subscales were more likely to report more health problems in at least one EQ-5D-5L domain (p<0.05). Adjusting for socio-economic and health status, three EQ-5D-5L domains exhibited significant associations with various TP subscales (usual activities: PF and F, pain/discomfort: PN and F, anxiety/depression: PN, PF, PH and F). The anxiety/depression domain showed evidence of cut-point shift; individuals with higher PH or F scale scores were less likely to report moderate-to-extreme problems vs. no or slight problems (PH: 0.58, 95%CI 0.40-0.86 and F: 0.42, 95%CI 0.26-0.69) relative to slight-to-extreme problems vs. no problems (PH: 0.90, 95%CI 0.73-1.10 and F: 0.75, 95%CI 0.57-0.99). Adjusting for socio-demographic and health status, EQ VAS scores were associated with PN, PF, PH and F and EQ-5D-5L index scores with PF and F subscales. Respondents’ TP profile increased the explained variance in EQ VAS from 26.6% to 30.2% and in EQ-5D-5L index from 30.9% to 32.6%. Conclusions: This is the first study to explore the association between individuals’ TP and self-reported health on the EQ-5D and also the first to identify response heterogeneity (cut-point shift) stemming from psychological characteristics in the EQ-5D. These findings increase our understanding of the non-health-related factors that affect self-reported health and the potential sources of bias in QALYs and cost-effectiveness outcomes.
