The EQ-5D descriptive system includes dimensions that are measured using a single item for amenability to valuation. Such an approach to instrument design facilitates the generation of utility values but limits the possibility of collecting rich profile information about the patients’ status on each dimension. To address this gap the Descriptive Systems Working Group have proposed an extension to the core instrument that combines the benefits of both preference-accompanied and profile measures. This is a multi layered approach to measuring health and quality of life that generates Dimension Specific Modules (DSMs). The Executive Committee previously funded the Deep Dive Pilot study that includes an empirical exploration of developing a DSM in existing data that includes the EQ-5D-5L and other measures of HRQoL such as the SF-36 and PROMIS-29. The analysis of existing data included in the pilot study is informative in terms of exploring the development of DSMs. However it is limited due to the use of items from non EuroQol instruments as those tested within each DSM. Another strategic and methodological issue relates to which EQ-5D-5L dimension, or dimensions, should be used to provide further proof of concept for a DSM. An alternative approach would be to focus testing solely on experimental instruments and modifications in the EuroQol suite. For example, exploring DSMs using bolt-on constructs that meet the criteria for a DSM (i.e. a global construct with evidence of sub domains such as Cognition). The aim of this proposal is to leverage an ongoing cognition bolt on data collection, and to explore how a DSM could be constructed psychometrically when all items follow the EuroQol format, and also when all items are owned by EuroQol (EQ-5D-5L, EQ-5D-5L bolt on and sub domains and EQ-HWB items). The benefit of this is that the analysis will extend that done in the DSM pilot study as all items tested will be owned by EuroQol. Two cognition specific DSMs will be formed and tested across all analyses conducted. The analysis used will combine classical psychometrics, factor analysis and modern test theory (IRT) to explore the most appropriate approaches to develop a DSM. This will include assessing construct validity, dimensionality and item performance, linking items within a DSM, and associated score generation. The results from the psychometric methods will be triangulated to provide insight into the feasibility of developing DSMs within a multi-layered approach.
