Background: Congenital heart disease (CHD) is defined as a gross structural abnormality of the heart and/or great vessels at birth and is the leading birth defect. With increasing numbers of patients surviving through childhood and into adulthood, growing interest has been given to the health-related quality of life (HRQoL) of patients with CHD. The EQ-5D-Y is one of the most commonly used generic preference-weighted measures for assessing a child’s HRQoL. Currently, there is no evidence about the feasibility and validity of the EQ-5D-Y-3L or EQ-5D-Y-5L for paediatric patients living with CHD. Aim of research: To examine the feasibility, validity, and responsiveness of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L in measuring HRQoL of paediatric CHD patients in China, and to compare their psychometric properties with PedsQL. Proposed methods: This prospective, longitudinal, study will recruit CHD patients aged 6 – 15 years from two tertiary general and children’s hospitals in China. At baseline, participants will self-complete a paper questionnaire that includes the EQ-5D-Y-3L, EQ-5D-Y-5L, generic PedsQL scale (PedsQL 4.0), and PedsQL cardiac-specific modules (PedsQL 3.0). Interviewer administered versions of the EQ-5D-Y-5L and PedsQL instruments will be available for children aged 6 and 7 as well as those unable to complete the self-administered version on their own. Participants who will receive surgery will be followed up at 3-months after the surgery. Feasibility, known-groups validity, convergent validity, and responsiveness will be assessed for both the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-5L-Y. Benefits to the group: This study addresses several research priorities highlighted in the current call for proposals of the EuroQol Research Foundation. It will be the first validation study for the EQ-5D-Y-3L and the EQ-5D-Y-5L in paediatric patients in China. The results from this study will generate important evidence about the psychometric properties of the EQ-5D-Y and in comparison with PedsQL, a potential competitor of the EQ instruments. In addition, this study would potential be useful in either developing or validating the mapping function between EQ-5D-Y-3L and Y-5L.
