Introduction: Cognitive debriefing (CD) is an essential component of the translation process from English into a target language for all EuroQol self-complete instruments. It is traditionally conducted through face-to-face (F2F) interviews. However, since F2F interviews are not always feasible, there is increasing interest in the use of virtual CD approaches. To date, the feasibility of conducting CD interviews, especially the administration of the qualifier ranking task via online panels, has not been systematically explored. This study aimed to assess the feasibility, as well as the strengths and limitations, of online CD interviews.Methods: A website was developed for online ranking tasks and tested prior to formal data collection. Sixteen respondents were recruited in accordance with the Version Modification Committee (VMC) requirements; eight from China using the Simplified Chinese EQ-5D-5L version and eight Singapore who used the English version. Online CD interviews consisted of three sequential components: the severity qualifier ranking exercise, independent completion of the EQ-5D-5L, and a follow-up CD interview. Two local research assistants were recruited to help disseminate the interview information and recruit respondents. Eligible respondents received a meeting invitation if they consented to participate. Interviews were conducted via Zoom in Singapore and Tencent Meeting in China and were recorded with automatic transcription. Throughout the interviews, the interviewer observed participants’ responses and independently recorded reflections on the strengths and limitations of the virtual format.Results: The respondents were recruited for each country fulfilling the sample requirement as suggested by the EuroQol Translation Guideline. The mean age of respondents was 48.6 years in China and 46.6 years in Singapore, with mean interview durations of 44 minutes (range: 34.0–53.2) and 38 minutes (range: 30.3–44.0), respectively. All Singaporean participants completed the ranking tasks correctly, whereas two respondents in China did not rank all items correctly (but were able to self-complete the EQ-5D-5L and complete the cognitive debriefing interview). All respondents completed the interviews and demonstrated adequate understanding of the interview instructions.Discussion: In general, online CD was feasible in Singapore and among the six younger respondents in China. The two respondents were a 30-year-old woman with a low level of education and a 74-year-old man with a low level of education. Key advantages of online CD included broader geographic reach and greater scheduling flexibility compared with F2F interviews, and rigorous quality control. However, limitations remain, particularly in reaching vulnerable populations who may lack the digital skills or resources required for online participation, and in managing potential internet disruptions. While online CD can provide information equivalent to F2F interviews when applied to appropriate populations, F2F approaches remain more suitable for older and less technically proficient populations.
