This 18-month study (Project 1670-VS), funded from 1 September 2023 to 1 April 2025, aimed to develop Pakistan’s nationally representative EQ-5D-5L value set. The study followed the EuroQol Group’s standardized valuation protocol and employed both composite time trade-off (cTTO) and discrete choice experiment (DCE) methods. A total of 1,000 adults (aged 18 and above) were recruited through a multi-center, population-based approach that captured Pakistan’s ethnic and regional diversity. Participants were enrolled from six cities: Lahore, Karachi, Quetta, Peshawar (provincial capitals), Islamabad (federal capital), and Rawalpindi (twin city). Two preference elicitation tasks were employed: composite Time-Trade-Off (cTTO) and Discrete Choice Experiment (DCE). Each respondent completed 10 cTTO tasks, followed by 12 DCE tasks. Data collection was conducted via face-to-face interviews by eight trained data collectors using the EQ-PVT software. Quality control indicators were embedded in the valuation protocol and were followed for the study. For cTTO data, two models were created: GLS (random-effect model) and GLS Tobit (random effect, censored at − 1). For DCE data, conditional logit model was created. Combing the two datasets, two Hybrid models were created: Hybrid heteroskedastic model and Hybrid heteroskedastic Tobit. The model performance was evaluated using prediction accuracy, logical consistency of the parameter estimates, the significance level of the parameters (P<0.05), the model parsimony, and the goodness-of-fit using the Akaike information criterion (AIC) and Bayesian information criterion (BIC).A total of 1,138 interviews were conducted, of which 137 were excluded because they were pilot interviews; 1,001 were included in the final analysis. Characteristics of the final sample were generally comparable to the Pakistani population in terms of gender, marital status, and religion. Some statistically significant differences were observed across certain age groups, urban–rural residence, and ethnicity; however, the absolute differences were small, mostly within ±5%. The highest proportion of health problems was reported in the anxiety/depression dimension (54.9% reported ‘any problems’) and the lowest in the self-care dimension (0% reported ‘any problems’). The mean EQ VAS score was 78.27. The final value set was derived using the hybrid heteroskedastic Tobit model (Model 5), combining both cTTO and DCE data while accounting for censoring and variable error variances across health states. This model showed strong performance, with high correlation (r = 0.987, p < 0.001) with both cTTO-only and DCE-only models. The resulting utility values ranged from 1.000 for full health (11111) to –0.669 for the worst health state (55555), with 13.82% of all health states (432 out of 3,125) valued below zero. Mobility had the largest negative impact on utility scores, followed by anxiety/depression and usual activities, while self-care and pain/discomfort had the lowest impact. All planned deliverables were completed; however, we acknowledge that the secondary methodological objective “Investigating the role of the 10-year-old child perspective on values” was not achieved. With consent from the Exec/Office, we sacrificed this methodological research question to salvage the EQ-5D-Y-3L project, in which there were some issues. This strategic decision ensured the timely and high-quality completion of the core EQ-5D-5L value set.
