IntroductionItch is a burdensome symptom across dermatological and non-dermatological systemic conditions which can impact health-related quality of life (HRQoL). In some countries, patients’ access to treatments is partly dependent on data from EQ-5D-5L to demonstrate the HRQoL benefits of a treatment. Therefore, the instrument’s sensitivity to itch is important. This systematic literature review aimed to identify and summarise published evidence relating to the EQ-5D-5L’s measurement properties in conditions where itch is a key symptom in adults.MethodsA systematic literature search was conducted using Ovid (Embase and MEDLINE) according to the PRISMA 2020 guidelines in February 2025 (PROSPERO No.: CRD420250650978). Included articles underwent quality assessment using two quality assessment tools, an adapted Grading of Recommendations Assessement, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) for quantitative studies and the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) checklist for qualitative studies.ResultsSearches identified 73 articles for final data extraction. Studies were conducted across 25 countries, covering 17 different dermatological conditions (e.g. psoriasis) and 9 non-dermatological (e.g. kidney diseases) conditions. Twenty-four publications were dedicated to the evaluation of psychometric properties of EQ-5D-5L. No studies were excluded based on quality assessment. All n=5 included qualitative studies were ‘Acceptable’ quality (CASP). Within quantitative studies (n=68), n=15, n=52, and n=1 were graded as high, medium, and low quality respectively (GRADE). Qualitative investigations of content validity (n=5) reported that the EQ-5D-5L was comprehensible and relevant. Of three studies exploring missing concepts, social relationships was most commonly highlighted as missing. Itch was reported missing in one study and was the most frequent spontaneously reported symptom in another study.Evidence was found for convergent validity (n=32), known-groups validity (n=25), responsiveness (n=20), ceiling effects (n=20), and test-retest reliability (n=1). The EQ-5D-5L demonstrated some evidence of being able to discriminate between known-groups defined by symptom presence or condition severity. There was mixed evidence for convergent validity between the EQ-5D-5L and other HRQoL measures as correlations varied from weak to strong associations. There was also insufficient evidence to support the responsiveness of the EQ-5D-5L, many articles reported change over time however only few studies assessed the change in EQ-5D-5L against changes in other validated measures.ConclusionsThis review identified a large number of studies demonstrating mixed evidence of psychometric properties of the EQ-5D-5L in conditions where itch is a key symptom, predominantly in dermatological conditions. Further studies are needed to strengthen the evidence base for under-researched measurement properties and to assess the potential value of the skin irritation (itch) bolt-on from the EQ-5D Bolt-on Toolbox across different conditions.
