To support value-based health care, many hospitals are developing dashboards to collect patient reported outcomes (PROM), with future aspirations to use results to support decision making at the hospital and individual patient level. In the proposed PhD project, our objective is to demonstrate the value of the EQ-5D to support clinical decision making at the individual level, using data from smaller scale databases that can be realistically collected within a short time and within a health care organization. The proposed project is a combination of qualitative focus groups and interviews, survey methods and prediction modelling. Our aims are:   To develop validated displays for both the descriptive system as well as the VAS score that accurately and comprehensibly present EQ-5D-5L outcome data of a single patient, in that moment, over time, and present outcomes of different treatment options.   In WP1, we will develop and test different display formats of the EQ-5D-5L descriptive system and VAS that will enable patients to compare their own health state at that moment with their own historical data and future health state after intervention(s). Subsequently, we will elicit patient, caregiver, health professional and population preferences for different display formats of the EQ-5D outcomes and test the impact of display format on comprehension of information that is presented in the displays.  To demonstrate responsiveness of the EQ-5D-5L to changes in health status and the ability of predictive models to offer reliable estimates of future EQ-5D health status on the individual level.   In WP2, we will study the responsiveness of the EQ-5D to changes in functioning and health status as a result of intervention or disease progression (or improvement) on the individual level for four different case studies in osteoarthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and colorectal cancer. Then, we will determine the predictive power for both the descriptive system of the EQ-5D as well as the VAS using a risk based and an effect-based approach. Finally, we will determine how database size will impact reliability of predictions of future health status.   To demonstrate proof of concept by implementing optimal displays with the most promising predictive models for at least one case study.   In WP3, we will implement findings in an existing web-based tool and test feasibility and usability in ten patients.  If funded, this four year PhD project will result in one systematic literature review (Paper #1), two user centered design studies with different sample sizes and research methods (Paper #2 and #3) and a minimum of two papers on the responsiveness and predictive power of EQ-5D-5L in two different case studies (Paper #4 and #5). If the EQ-5D could prove value as an instrument for clinical decision support, this could increase the implementation potential of the EQ-5D in large scale databases as a result of patient effort directly benefitting the same patient.
