Aims: EQ-5D has been widely used in many different health conditions and the amount of evidence of its psychometric properties has increased over recent years. The primary aim of this study was to review papers reporting systematic reviews of the validity, reliability and/or responsiveness of EQ-5D. A secondary aim was to review other evidence about the extent to which EQ-5D covers the dimensions of health affectedby various health conditions.Methods: Medline and Embase were searched for systematic reviews of the performance of EQ-5D. Supplementarysearches were carried out in Cochrane Library, Web of Science, reference lists of included studies, the EuroQol databaseand hand searching of EuroQol Scientific Plenary Proceedings. In addition the website of the Oxford Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs) Group was searched for reports. Papers providing an overview of evidence relating to the validity, reliability and/or responsiveness of EQ-5D based on a systematic review were included. Data were extracted using a template designed specifically for the study.Results: 25reviewswere identified in this studyand a further 18reviewswere identified from the Oxford PROMgroupwebsite. The papers covered a range of conditions. Overall there was evidence of good to fair performance of EQ-5D in depression, diabetes (type 2), rheumatoid arthritis, skin conditions, cancer, cardiovascular disease, asthma, personality disorder and urinary incontinence. The evidence was mixed in COPD, dementia, schizophrenia and vision disorders, and poor for hearing disorders. The was little or no evidence for liver transplantation, venous leg ulcers, haemophilia, skin cancer, systemic lupus erythematous, bipolar disorderand low back pain; although the limited evidence showed positive results for liver transplantation, haemophilia and leg ulcers.Conclusions:This study has identified several reviews of the performance of EQ-5D. Most of the evidence suggests good psychometric properties of EQ-5D; however there are particular concerns about its ability to capture the impact of dementia, schizophrenia, visual impairment and hearing disorders. Further research is encouraged to: (i) review the literature for areas where reviews have not yet been published; (ii) conduct more primary research into the psychometric properties of EQ-5D where data are lacking; and (iii) further explore the use of bolt-ons where performance of EQ-5D is poor.
