Objective: Traditionally, researchers extract latent coefficients using the conventional random utility maximization (RUM). Recently, a new model, the Random Regret Minimization (RRM) postulates that people making choices by minimizing the anticipated regret. This study aims to examine whether RUM or RRM better describes how people make decisions when faced with different levels of risks and survivals. Methods: A discrete choice experiment (DCE) was designed with 6 attributes including the 5 items of the EQ-5D-5L (mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort, and anxiety/depression) and out-of-pocket costs as % of annual household income (5%, 10%, 20% and 50%). The Amazon MTurk, a crowdsourcing web survey platform was used to collect data in September 2022. Modified Federov algorithm was used to design 16 different choice sets. For each choice set, respondents were presented with 3 different alternatives. Each choice set was described using a short 3-month survival or a relatively long 10-year survival. One dominant test choice set was included for each respondent’s choice sets for quality screening. Separate estimations of the traditional RUM and the three different RRM models were compared to understand how people make choices subject to different risks and survivals. The three RRM models included the general uRRM model, the classic RRM (assumes µ =1) and the pure RRM (assumes µ =0). Results: Out of 500 respondents, 47.6% (238/500) passed the screening test and included in the analysis. Respondents’ mean age was 36.5 years (SD ±10.8); 58% male; 89.5% white, 4.6% black and 76.9% of them were married. Further, 91.6% of them completed college degrees and, most of them have health insurances via commercial (32.8%), Medicare (44.5%), Medicaid (13.5%) and Affordable Care Act (3.8%). Estimated coefficients of all 5 EQ-5D-5L items were significant across all models in both survival scenarios except for self-care. The out-of-pocket cost showed significance when respondents faced with 3-month survival (p<0.05), and not significant in the 10-year survival scenario. Value of µ from the µRRM were closed to zero indicating that µRRM collapses into pure-RRM and that respondents showed a strong semi-compensatory behavior while making decisions in both 3-month (µ=0.001) and 10-year survival scenarios (µ=0.019). The log-likelihood estimations were comparable across different models suggested that these models had similar fittings to the data. Conclusion: Respondents were sensitive to the out-of-pocket costs when faced with short-term survival. When survival was emphasized in choice-making scenarios, regret minimization better described choice behaviors than utility maximization. Further investigation is warranted to assess how people make health choices when subject to different risks and survivals.
