The EuroQol Health and Wellbeing Short (EQ-HWB-9) is an internationally developed instrument for evaluating the impact of health, public health and social care interventions on patients and carers.(1,2)  Research is needed to evaluate the performance of the EQ-HWB-9 in younger populations (3) and the proposed study aims to address this evidence gap.The EQ-HWB-9 has been included in an Australian randomised controlled trial (Transition Compass (4)), which aims to improve the transition of young people with chronic disease from paediatric to adult health care. Currently, the processes and experiences of transition to adult care are often suboptimal with high rates of patients disengaging from specialist care as they enter adult services, resulting in increased reliance on crisis-driven and emergency care.  Transition Compass will evaluate a consumer-driven care model to improve transition, aiming to decrease healthcare disengagement and reduce crisis-driven care and its impact on both individual patients and the healthcare system. We know that young adults with chronic disease report poorer quality of life than the general population.  A recent study identified that half of the cohort of adolescents and young adults with chronic conditions experienced moderate to severe impact to their health-related quality of life (5).   Transition Compass will recruit approximately 400 young adults aged 16-18 years with chronic health conditions in their final year of paediatric care before transition to adult healthcare.  Participants will complete study surveys at baseline with follow up at one year post discharge from paediatric care. Participant quality of life and wellbeing will be measured using several psychological instruments, including EQ-HWB-9, PROMIS Scale Global Health (PROMIS-10), Emotion Thermometer: Distress, and On Your Own Feet Self-Efficacy Scale.  This provides a novel opportunity to examine the use of the EQ-HWB-9 in a population of young adults with chronic health conditions.  It is anticipated that the Transition Compass trial intervention will improve participants’ quality of life over time.The study for which EuroQol funding is sought aims to examine the validity and responsiveness to change of the EQ-HWB-9 in a population of young adults with chronic health conditions.  Specifically, we aim to validate the scale in this population using response distribution; convergent validity analysis and known group validity analysis across a range of known groups; and determine if the instrument is responsive to change over time (between baseline and follow-up).
