IntroductionThe study aim is to investigate the mutual cross-sectional relationships between PROMs (EQ-5D-5L) and PREMs (Picker, ReproQ-8D) with and without case-mix adjustment (socio-demographic, clinical, process of care, socio-economic status [SES] variables) in antenatal and postnatal care (Dutch healthcare system), using different instruments (EQ research priority). The research questions were (see proposal):AIM 1: Investigate whether EQ-VAS scores depend primarily on underlying EQ-5D PROMs information, particularly domain-wise, where substantial explanatory power is hypothesized.Embedded we checked the need for context-specific bolt-ons and the relevance of socio-demographic casemix factors, if these outcomes are used for quality of care (performance) purposes. AIM 2: Investigate whether Picker scores primarily reflect specific PREM information (ReproQ domains), where substantial explanatory power is hypothesized. Embedded we could check the need for casemix adjustment.AIM 3: Estimate for the EQ-5D-5L PROMs (domain scores, index, LSS) and EQ-VAS the influence of PREM measures (carry-over effect) where it is hypothesized that this effect should be minimal. And, reversely, the carry-over effect of the same PROMs for the PREMs (Picker, ReproQ8D), where it is hypothesized that this effect should be minimal.AIM 4: Study the role of SES in case-mix adjustment. I.e., to test whether the findings from AIMS 1-3 are essentially unrelated to deprivation/low SES, which is a pre-condition for straightforward use by clients of PROM and PREM data in monitoring quality of care.AIM 5: Test whether the relation between covariables and EQ-VAS (PROM) in the upper part of the VAS scale is different from relations in the lower part of the VAS scale; and the same for Picker score (PREM). Rationale of AIM 5 is that both PROMs and PREMs are statistically difficult to explain from underlying factors, even with a comprehensive predictor set. Hypothetically, relations are not equivalent across the range of the outcome. For example, for groups in rather good health EQ-VAS scores are possibly explained by an array of non-medical factors while for groups in poor health EQ-VAS is mainly explained by health-related factors (confounding).  The following sub-aims were added: 1) a longitudinal analysis (paired EQ-ANTE /EQ-POST data); 2) the adjustment of socio-economic status educational level as individual characteristic vs. composite SES indicator based on ZIP-code); 3) study of the well-known but difficult to understand poor explanatory performance of EQVAS as PROM compared to the Picker PREM models.METHODSData. We used data from a nationally representative cohort of >8000 pregnant women (covering 70% of perinatal care units), with longitudinal outcome data on: (1) PROMs (EQ-5D-5L, EQ-VAS, condition specific maternal PROMs, condition specific newborn PROMs, obtained via maternal report and administrative routes); (2) PREMs (ReproQ-8D, an 8-dimensional validated WHO-based questionnaire; Picker score); (3) socio-demographic characteristics; and (4) complete clinical and process of care profile. This high-quality dataset was sufficiently large for analysis of subgroups of respondents/women with serious medical conditions.Datasets. Five specific datasets were created: Four cross-sectional datasets (EQVAS-ANTE (=antenatal), EQVAS-POST (=postnatal), PICKER-ANTE, PICKER-POST as dependent variables), and one longitudinal dataset for analysis of differences (paired EQ-ANTE and EQ-POST). The clinical and process of care variables differ between the ANTE and POST datasets. Analysis. 1. Univariable and multivariable linear regression (OLS, with/ without transformation of the dependent variable, forced entry of covariables) as point of departure. STEPWISE OLS (with/without transformation) was used to investigate the relative importance of predictors. 2. Dependent variables: EQ-VAS score (ANTE, POST) in AIM1; Picker-score (ANTE, POST) in AIM2; and all four outcomes in AIM3 and AIM4; and the difference (POST–ANTE) score in AIM5.3. For each AIM a large set of models was estimated, with the same structure (ANTE/POST, summary scores (Picker, EQVAS, EQ-Index, EQ-LSS, ReproQ Personal and Setting summary scores vs. EQ-5D and ReproQ-8D domain scores), with/without transformation, different covariable/clinical factors sets, ENTER/STEPWISE). Model changes were partially carried out to test systematically the role of (i) the selected variable set, (ii) transformation of the dependent variable, (iii) confounding (regular vs. stratified multivariable models) and (iv) multilevel effect. 4. Alternative models were compared in terms of R2 (proportion of variance explained) of the PREM effect (in PROM models; AIM 1) or PROM effect (in PREM models; AIM 2). Adjusted R2 were always 0.01-0.02 smaller than absolute R2 due to large sample size and were avoided (lack of relevance).5. The multivariable analyses were structured as follows:- a. We compared for the EQ-VAS models (AIM 1) the impact of EQ-PROM info (3 variants) as covariables, PREMs (3 variants), socio-demographic and clinical and process of care variables (1 variant), and socio-economic status (2 variants); together 3*3*2 =18 models (see T9+T10+T11).- b. Next, we repeated a., using different transformations of the dependent variable (root, square, natural logarithm, exponent). These transformations neither provided additional insight, nor improved the R2 values importantly.- c. Next, we used stratified analysis for (1) the dependent variable (focusing on the lower range outcomes to avoid the possible ceiling effect; cut-off 85%); and (2) the PREMs (cut-off 85%).- d. Finally, the dependent variable was dichotomized (1/0 variable) based on the same cut-off as in c., and multivariable logistic regression analysis was applied.For AIM2, the roles of PREMs and PROMs were reversed.-e. Finally we added multilevel analysis for EQ-VAS, with perinatal unit as multilevel effect.6. Sensitivity analysis was done for (a) the impact of SES (educational level vs. ZIP-based composite SES index); and (b) the potentially modifying effects of SES (comprehensive regression model vs. stratified analysis; i.e. confounding).RESULTS/DISCUSSIONThe key results are summarized in a Table book (56 tables, 7 Appendices). AIM1: The gain in explanatory power of PREMs (irrespective of precise measure) on EQVAS invariably is small; R2-change is +0.01-0.02 and coefficient size was low. Model adaptations sometimes increased or decreased R2 but never altered the PREM impact. The statistical results are supported by the XY-plot of Picker and EQ-VAS both ANTE and POST (Table Appendix 1). AIM2: The explanatory power of adding PROMs to PREMs is slightly larger than the reverse, yet small (R2 change +0.02-0.03; note that PREM models in general perform better). The type of PROM measure mattered somewhat; EQVAS had slightly more impact than EQ-5D and its derivatives. Model adaptations some­times impacted R2, but never the PROM impact. See also XY-plot of Picker and EQ-VAS (Table Appendix 1).SUBAIM OF 1. AND 2. CASEMIX adjustment Considering the minimal R2 values and the generally small coefficient sizes, casemix adjustment for potential PREM differences is not needed for the evaluation of quality of care performance with EQ5D/EQ-VAS as reference. The same applies for the reverse case. AIM3: Of the EQ-5D-domains, self-care has largest impact on PREMs, particularly for self–care levels L3-5. Overall the impact is small in terms of R2.AIM4: A head-to-head comparison between self-reported educational level and an official ZIP-based composite SES index showed that the association between both indicators is weaker than expected. This suggests that prosperity and living in a high-quality area does not strongly depend on a pregnant woman’s own level of education. Yet, the R2 of both indicators (in multivariable models) was comparable; if anything, the ZIP-based index performed slightly better. In terms of coef­ficient size, the gradient of higher EQ-VAS with higher SES-level was small relative to the scale, and standard errors were large. Using stratified analyses (3 strata for SES) showed a strong effect from stratification, i.e. demonstrated strong confounding: PROM and PREM models improved substantially, with stratified models with highest R2 seen at the extreme upper and extreme lower end of the SES scale. This cannot be explained by overspecification (large sample). Usually the model with low R2 was the model that included all SES-strata. We conclude that EQ-VAS and Picker models behave differently according to SES stratum. This should be analysed using stratified analyses. This cannot be covered by treating the SES as independent covariate nor as interaction term. While confounding is the likely cause, we cannot exclude effects from response heterogeneity. INCIDENTAL FINDINGS of AIM1 and AIM2: EQVAS models perform better (in terms of R2) in strata with lower PREM scores, and, reversely, Picker models perform better in strata with lower EQ5D/EQVAS scores. This suggests that the performance of EQ-VAS models is strongly affected (lower R2) by the presence of satisfied (!) respondents who add/subtract EQ-VAS points, not on the basis of their perceived health but for other reasons. AIM5: Stratified analysis (five EQ-VAS strata in AIM1; five Picker strata in AIM2) showed that the performance (in terms of R2) of any of the 5 stratified models was worse compared to the combined model. These results are opposed to the analysis of SES. INCIDENTAL FINDINGS1.There was no multilevel effect of perinatal care unit for the EQ-VAS ANTE data. Analysis of the EQVAS-POST data showed a low to modest multilevel effect, with impact on the coefficients related to process of care (indicators of high perinatal risk: secondary care only and referral from primary to secondary care) but not the other variables. Change of model log-likelihood and change of AIC were both ≈ 0.5%. Despite strong arguments to apply multilevel analysis with perinatal care unit as level, the effect for model performance was (very) modest.2.The analysis on difference scores suggests that (individual) difference scores are accessible for analysis, even with inclusion of difference scores of co-factors (when these factors can be subject to change over time). 3.Two surprising findings were:A. Overall, PREM-models showed better performance (in terms of R2) than the PROM-models, despite the skewed Picker distributions and less potential PREM cofactors.B. Overall, the EQVAS ANTE models showed better performance (in terms of R2) than the EQVAS POST models despite considerably more relevant covariables for EQVAS POST analyses.There are two non-mutually exclusive explanations for this observation:Firstly, postnatally mothers exhibit various very specific symptoms/complaints, adding to heterogeneity, that are hardly covered by the EQ-5D domains: e.g., breast-related symptoms, problems of urination and defaecation, psychological symptoms [not at all covered by AD domain]. The antenatal phase is characterized by fewer symptoms in general, and e.g. the psychological ones fit bitter to the AD domain.The relatively poor performance of EQVAS models in persons with a condition may be the result of underspecification of the model (practically: lack of bolt-ons).Secondly, having a specific disease condition (that might impact EQ5D scores) vs. experiencing non-wellbeing (extending to EQ5D impact) reflects very different pathways. Presence or absence of a specific disease condition could be another case of confounding (support from the POPCORN study). The same might be true for severe vs. mild disease or symptoms. If true, this phenomenon might affect the results of descriptive as well as valuation studies.4. Overall, the L1 vs L2-L5 dichotomy performed inferior to the L1-L2 vs L3-L5 dichotomy in our case. Conclusions: see highlights
