The recent published version with 5 levels of response of the EQ-5D-Y need to be studied and compared to the already approved 3 levels in chronic illness Youngs. The study and the availability of the dataset in children and adolescents including severe health states are crucial to increase the variability of health states to describe and to develop the mathematical utilities and analysis required to research and clinically promote EQ-5D-Y-5L. Youngs with cancer, one of most prevalent and relevant diseases in children and adolescents, usually report severe health states. For this, the major aim of the present study was to assess and compare the psychometric properties of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L in terms of feasibility, ceiling effect, redistribution properties, informativity and inconsistence responses in children with cancer. Methods: A core set of self-report tools, including the Spanish version of the EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L, were administered to children drawn from the cancer population. The EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L were evaluated in terms of feasibility, ceiling effects, redistribution properties, differences in absolute and relative informativity. The main results were obtained from a total of 73 children (9.7 ± 2.3 years old) from cancer population who participated in the study. We included children aged 6─14 years. There were 3 diagnostic groups involved: haematological cancer (leukemia and lymphomas), solid tumours (malignant bone tumours, soft tissue and other extra osseous sarcomas, neuroblastoma and other peripheral nervous cell tumours or renal tumours) and brain tumours. No missing data in the new EQ-5D-Y-5L were visualized, so the feasibility was acceptable. The EQ-5D-Y-5L showed a low ceiling effect in all dimensions with relative changed from EQ-5D-Y-3L to EQ-5D-Y-5L between 15.3 % and 42.4% the dimensions and 44.6 % for overall system. Compared to EQ-5D-Y-3L, the EQ-5D-Y-5L provided a better distribution of the severity of the problem into the five levels of response. Absolute informativity (Shannon's index) not showed statistically significant differences between EQ-5D-Y-3L and EQ-5D-Y-5L in all dimension and overall system. To conclude, the EQ-5D-Y-5L is feasible, present lower ceiling effect and higher discriminative power than EQ-5D-Y-3L. On the other hand, the results of the current study have contributed to support the appropriateness and usefulness of EQ-5D-Y-5L as officially approved version. The dataset will contribute to develop a large dataset to further research.
