Objectives: This study aimed to (1) explore how respondents use the composites to self-report health and what the meaning of discomfort is in the EQ-5D for the general public; and (2) compare measurement properties of the descriptive systems of EQ-5D-5L and two Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System short forms, PROMIS-29+2 and PROMIS Global Health (PROMIS-GH-10), and of EQ-5D-5L and PROPr utilities. Methods: Both qualitative and quantitative data were collected in an online cross-sectional survey involving a representative general population sample in Hungary (n=1700). Respondents completed the EQ-5D-5L, followed by the composites split up to individual subdomains, PROMIS-29+2 and PROMIS-GH-10. Open-ended questions were asked to explore respondents’ interpretations and experiences of discomfort. We compared the following measurement properties of the EQ-5D-5L and PROMIS instruments at the level of items, domains and utilities, the latter using corresponding US value sets: ceiling and floor, informativity (Shannon’s indices), agreement, convergent and known-group validity. For the analyses, PROMIS items/domains were matched to EQ-5D-5L domains that cover similar concepts of health. Results: Six different response behaviours were identified in the composites: ‘uniform’, ‘most severe’, ‘least severe’, ‘average’, ‘synergistic’ and ‘inconsistent’. Compared to the individual subdomains, many respondents underreported their problems on both composites. In respondents that scored differently in the two separate concepts, mainly problems with the first subdomain determined responses on the composites. The discomfort subdomain in the EQ-5D captured over one hundred different problems, including pain, non-pain physical discomfort (e.g. tiredness, dizziness, nausea) and psychological discomfort (e.g. anxiety, nervousness, sadness). Women, elderly respondents and those in worse general health status more often considered discomfort as pain. Discomfort was more strongly correlated with anxiety than with pain. The majority of PROMIS items showed enhanced distributional characteristics, including lower ceilings and higher informativity compared to the EQ-5D-5L. Good convergent validity was established between EQ-5D-5L and PROMIS domains capturing similar aspects of health. Mean EQ-5D-5L utilities were substantially higher than those of PROPr. EQ-5D-5L utilities correlated moderately or strongly with PROPr, PROMIS-GH-10 physical and mental health summary scores. EQ-5D-5L utilities decreased with age, whereas PROPr utilities slightly increased with age. EQ-5D-5L utilities discriminated significantly better in most known groups defined by age, self-perceived health status and self-reported (physician-diagnosed) health conditions. Conclusions: We found empirical evidence of measurement error in the composite responses on the EQ-5D, including under- and inconsistent reporting, ordering effects, potential differential item functioning and inter-domain dependency. Our findings contribute new knowledge to the development of new and refinement of existing self-reported health status instruments, also beyond the EQ-5D. Furthermore, the study provided comparative evidence on the measurement properties of EQ-5D-5L, PROMIS-29+2 and PROMIS-GH-10 and the results are expected to inform decisions about the choice of instruments in population health surveys, for assessment of patients’ health and for cost-utility analyses.
