Background: There is increasing interest in preference-accompanied measures of health for paediatric populations. The EQ-5D-Y-3L is one of such instruments, but the lack of a Dutch value set prevents its use in economic evaluations of health care interventions in the Netherlands. Furthermore, EQ-5D-Y-3L health states are commonly valued from the perspective of a 10-year old child. The use of this proxy perspective (henceforth called proxy-proxy) has been a source of discussion. Other perspectives could also be used, such as a substitute perspective (henceforth called proxy-substitute): i.e. adults considering what they think a 10-year old child would decide for itself. Objectives: Our main objective was to derive a value set for the EQ-5D-Y-3L for the Netherlands. Furthermore, we explore how the outcomes, dispersion and response patterns of composite time trade-off (cTTO) valuation differs between proxy-substitute and proxy-proxy perspectives. Methods: Composite Time Trade Off (cTTO) data were collected using videoconferencing interviews, with each respondent completing 10 cTTO tasks. A target sample of 400 respondents was collected, with half of the respondents being randomized to the proxy-proxy arm, and the other half to the proxy-substitute arm. Discrete Choice Experiment (DCE) data were collected using an online survey, with a target sample of 1000 respondents each completing 15 paired comparisons. DCE data were analysed using a 10-parameter mixed logit model and anchored to the QALY scale using the mean observed cTTO values. Results: The level 3 weight for pain/discomfort was the largest, followed by feeling worried, sad or unhappy, usual activities, mobility and self-care. Health state values ranged between 1 and -0.218. The use of proxy-proxy and proxy-substitute preferences yielded different EQ-5D-Y-3L valuation outcomes. For states in which children had a lot of pain and were very worried, sad or unhappy, respondents’ valuations were lower in proxy-proxy rather than proxy-substitute preferences. (by about 0.2). Within-subjects variation across health states was lower for proxy-substitute preferences than proxy-proxy preferences. Analyses of response patterns suggest that data for proxy-substitute preferences were less clustered. Conclusions: This study generated a Dutch value set for the EQ-5D-Y-3L, which can be used for the computation of quality-adjusted life years (QALY’s) for economic evaluations of healthcare interventions in paediatric populations. There are systematic differences between cTTO responses given by adults deciding for children and adults considering what children would want for themselves. Besides warranting further qualitative exploration, such differences contribute to the ongoing normative discussion surrounding the source and perspective used for valuation of child and adolescent health.
