Background: In order to estimate a country-specific EQ-5D-5L value set, time trade-off (TTO) values of a subset of EQ-5D-5L health states were recently elicited from a general population sample (N=1250) in China using the EuroQol Group’s EQ-VT system. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the ability of various linear regression models to predict disutility (or utility) values of EQ-5D-5L health states.Methods: Characteristics of EQ-5D-5L health states were modelled to predict disutility values. Model specifications tested included main effects of different levels and types of EQ-5D-5L health problems, main effects with selected first-order interaction terms, and extended N3 and D1 models. All models were also tested with addition of one of two alternative terms, M1 (1, if slight problems in only 1 dimension and no problems in the remaining dimensions; 0, otherwise) and M2 (1, if slight problems in 1 or 2 dimensions and no problems in the remaining dimensions; 0, otherwise). Each model was estimated with 70% of the study sample and assessed for goodness of fit and prediction bias with the remaining 30% of the sample. Model prediction bias was visually examined by plotting the predicted and actual values for observed health states. Results: For all model specifications tested, the random-effects model was more efficient than the fixed-effects model (p>0.05 for all, Hausman test). The M1 and M2 terms were statistically significant in almost all models. However, the estimated effect of ‘slightly anxious/depressed’ turned negative in most models when the M1 term was added. All criteria considered, the model contained all main effects, the M2 term, and a fixed constant (defined as ‘M2 model’) or a varying constant as specified by the D1 term (defined as ‘D1-M2 model’) was most suitable for estimating the EQ-5D-5L TTO values in China. The two variants of the M2 model exhibited identical fit of the 30% of the sample which was not used for model estimation, with the mean absolute error being 0.0573 and the number of absolute errors >0.05 and >0.10 being 41 and 15, respectively. Conclusions: This study provides the algorithm for estimation of the EQ-5D-5L value set in China. The significance of the M terms suggests that Chinese rate the mildest EQ-5D-5L health states differently in the TTO exercise. Future studies should investigate whether this is the case in other populations and explore the reasons for this valuation behaviour.
