Introduction The EQ Health and Wellbeing (EQ-HWB) is a generic new instrument developed internationally to use in evaluating interventions across health, public health, and social care, and enabling the inclusion of impacts on caregivers. Evaluations of the instrument’s performance in a range of informal caregiver populations is now needed. We know that for caregivers of people living with dementia, providing informal care can significantly impact their health and wellbeing; whether the EQ-HWB is able to capture these impacts remains unclear. Using data collected through an Australian study of caregiver quality-of-life, this project aimed to investigate the psychometric properties of the EQ-HWB in caregivers of persons living with dementia. Method An online survey was developed which included demographic questions, informal care-related questions, and a range of quality-of-life measures suitable for caregivers (C-DEMQOL and CarerQol) as well as the 25-item EQ-HWB. The psychometric properties of the EQ-HWB and EQ-HWB-S (9-item short form) were assessed for acceptability (missing data), distribution (ceiling and floor effects), known groups and convergent validity analysis, and an exploration of dimensionality using exploratory factor analysis. Results Whilst some items were highly skewed, there were no floor or ceiling effects for either EQ-HWB instrument (answers to all items were at lowest (ie 111111111) or highest response level (ie 555555555)). Caregivers chose the two most severe responses for exhaustion (34.7% of responses were in the two most severe response categories, often or most/all of the time) and loneliness (25.7%)). In known group validity analysis, both EQ-HWB instruments performed well against the C-DEMQOL and CarerQol in terms of effect sizes (Cohen’s d and Eta-squared); however, the C-DEMQOL had higher effect sizes for dementia severity, and shared caregiving. At the item level, 13 of the 25 items were significantly different between groups when comparing caregiving time (2-groups), and 23 of 25 items were significant when comparing general health (2-groups). Most hypothesised correlations in convergent validity analysis were found to be above 0.3. Four items failed to load on to the EFA model (seeing, hearing, sleep, exhaustion), of which only exhaustion was from the EQ-HWB short form. Conclusion Our results suggest that the EQ-HWB instruments, both as sum-scores and index-scores, performed well in this population.
