One of the key foci of the World Health Organisation (WHO) and its member states is the improvement of child health globally (1)(2). As a result there has been an increase in measures to monitor child health, including Health Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) in children and adolescents has increased overthe last two decades (3).HRQoL measures aim to capture the subjective multi-dimensional constructs of HRQoL namely physical, social and psychological functioning which are relevant to health (4,5). By definition, an individual’s HRQoL is subjective and should be elicited by self-report whenever possible, even from children (6). This is not always possibly as there are those who are either too young or cognitively unaware to self-report and so it is necessary to rely onproxy report (6–12). Olderchildren can provide reliable and valid responses to measures like the EQ-5D-Y (13), Paediatric Quality of Life Measure (PedsQL) (14–16), Kidscreen (17–19), KINDL and Kiddy-KINDL (20). However, for younger children below the age of 7-8 years it is necessary to rely on proxy report. The EQ-5D-Y was developed and validated for children and adolescents aged 8-18 years by an international team under the EuroQol group (13,21–24). The youth version of the instrument was derived from the EQ-5D-3L, an adult HRQoL instrument. The primary use of the EQ-5D is to support the estimation of quality adjusted life years (QALYs) for economic evaluation. In recent years a large number of treatments have been developed for paediatric conditions which has increased the need for a child specific version of the EQ-5D, with an associated economic tariff. The EQ-5D-Y, like the adult version, includesfive dimensions but hasage appropriate descriptions.The EQ-5D-Y Proxy is a direct adaptation of the EQ-5D-Y for proxy completionand is currently recommended by the EuroQoL Foundation for use in children aged 4-8 years (25).Proxy version 1requires the respondent to rate the child’s health as the proxy perceives it to be. Proxy version 1 hasbeen validated in a Spanish study in children over six years of age (26)and the performance hasbeen examined in a few studies with children older than six years (27,28). Scalone et al (2011) tested the EQ-5D-Y proxy for suitability of the domains (from the child’s perspective) on ill children and healthy childrenattending kindergarten or school from age 4-11years (29). The authors concluded thatthe domains on the current EQ-5D-Y proxy self-careand usual activities are not considered suitable for younger children between the ages of 4-5 (29). Verstraete andJelsma (2017) report that the EQ-5D-Y Proxy version was acceptable tocaregivers of ill and typically developing children and performs well in children aged four years and older,but was not appropriate for very young children(30).
