Background: In datasets used for health inequality analysis, the selected indicators tend to have been used for decades: functional limitations, disabilities, and a simple subjective health evaluation. Little attention has been paid to consequences of using 'self-rated health' as an indicator to assess inequalities in health. Aims: The Equimetrics Project aimed to explore the potential of the EQ-5D-3L and EQ-5D-5L as outcome measures in health inequality analysis. We determined if there were differences in health status by country and by socio-economic status (SES) and by other stratifiers, such as gender and chronic disease status. We also compared the performance of the EQ-5D-3L and 5L in health inequality analysis. Methods: Data were collected from a multi-country cohort using a web-based survey that was administered to members of the general public aged 18 to 75 years from three European countries (United Kingdom (UK), Italy and the Netherlands). The survey included questions on sociodemographics, chronic disease and the EQ-5D-3L, EQ-5D-5L, EQ VAS, QOLIBRI-OS. We compared health-related quality of life (HRQL) across strata, such as SES, country, gender and disease groups, but also across measures (EQ-5D-3L, EQ-5D-5L, EQ VAS, QOLIBRI-OS). In addition, we calculated the slope index of inequality and relative index of inequality by country and by measure. Results: In total, 10,172 respondents completed the survey. Of these, 4,119 respondents were from the UK, 3,026 were from Italy and 3,027 were from the Netherlands. For each measure (EQ-5D-3L, EQ-5D-5L , EQ VAS and QOLJBRI-OS), HRQL was best for respondents from Italy and worst for respondents from the UK. Across countries, the UK had highest inequality with worse HRQL among those with a lower educational level and best HRQL among those with a high educational level, both for the total sample and stratified by gender. We observed the lowest inequality among respondents from Italy. For the EQ VAS and QOLIBRI-OS, country, gender and educational level patterns were mixed. The EQ-5D-5L outperformed the EQ-5D-3L in terms of ceilings (higher for EQ-5D-3L versus EQ-5D-5L) and absolute informativity. Conclusions: With regards to inequality analysis, the EQ-5D-5L showed larger contrasts compared to the EQ-5D-3L. However, these contrasts were smaller than expected. Most importantly, our study showed that EQ-5D instruments are suitable for assessing health inequalities in general population samples.
