This Descriptive System Working Group led pilot study was the first step in exploring the potential development of deep-dive modules for the EQ-5D-5L. The Deep Dive approach includes a higher-level preference- accompanied measure (i.e., the core EQ-5D descriptive system), and a set of items associated with each dimension (the deep-dive). As part of this exploration we have considered the conceptual basis, and the potential advantages and disadvantages of deep-dive modules, and also the methodological process for developing the modules, building on similar approaches used by other developer groups that we have identified. This resulted in an introduction paper outlining the approach (Mulhern et al 2022). The introduction paper provided the basis for a detailed consultation process with EuroQol stakeholders from key groups, including the Board, Executive Committee, Office, Working Groups and the Version Management Committee. Finally, we have conducted analysis of existing datasets including a range of HRQoL instruments to explore potential methodological approaches to develop deep-dive modules based on EQ-5D-5L dimensions. The results of this pilot work have been used to inform discussions about the broader programme. This has taken the form of ongoing discussions between the DSWG and Executive Committee. A draft memo titled “Deep-dive modules for the EQ-5D – What, why and how?” was recently put forward for the Exec based on this work (see attachments). This memo includes more advanced thinking around the overall deep-dive initiative that has developed since the original pilot study, and is therefore included here. This document is outside the remit of this pilot study but is important contextual information for the broader program, and the consideration of this final report.These discussions have led to a deprioritisation of the programme, but with renewed focus on methodological research and possible exploration of certain elements (e.g. one individual dimension or specific methodological aspects). This pilot work already contributes to this process, and the secondary data analysis has been reframed as informing the broader agenda of the DSWG and the wider group focused on the use of IRT methods (as part of a broader mixed methods protocol) to test and develop current (eg EQ-HWB-25) and future EuroQol instruments
