As health services move towards models of care that place patients and their values at the centre, the use of patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) to inform clinical care is increasing. The EQ-5D-Y-5L is a short, generic, paediatric PROM (P-PROM) and hence is a potential candidate for use in paediatric clinical care. However, prior to its uptake in clinical care, it is essential the measurement performance of the EQ-5D-Y-5L is assessed in different paediatric populations to ensure its validity. Additionally, further research is required to understand how the EQ-5D-Y-5L can be implemented and used as a clinical P-PROM. Consequently, this PhD project aims to assess the psychometric performance and clinical utility of the EQ-5D-Y-5L as a routine P-PROM in managing clinical care in a tertiary paediatric children’s hospital. A mixed methods approach was utilised across five key stages. - Stage 1: A rapid review of the literature was completed to understand how generic P-PROMs have been used in paediatric clinical care. - Stage 2: A psychometric assessment was performed to understand the measurement performance of the EQ-5D-Y-5L compared to other generic P-PROMs in Australian children, including children with different health conditions. Analysis was conducted using data from the QUOKKA paediatric multi-instrument comparison (PMIC) study. - Stage 3: Qualitative semi-structured interviews were conducted with patients, caregivers, and clinicians from a tertiary paediatric hospital to understand their perspectives on the use of generic PROMs, including the EQ-5D-Y-5L, in clinical care. Furthermore, a series of co-design work was completed to collaboratively design how the EQ-5D-Y-5L could be feasibly incorporated and fed back to families and clinicians as part of routine hospital outpatient clinical practice. This co-design was conducted with patients, caregivers, and clinicians to ensure a user-centric design. - Stage 4: A pilot randomised control trial (RCT) was conducted across four outpatient clinics at a tertiary paediatric hospital in Melbourne, Australia to assess the feasibility, acceptability and usefulness of implementing and using the EQ-5D-Y-5L, as co-designed, in paediatric outpatient care. Patients in the intervention arm received the EQ-5D-Y-5L as part of the clinical care, as co-designed, and patients in the control arm received usual care. A total of 87 patients were randomised as part of the study. Quantitative and qualitative outcomes were captured from participants, as well as clinicians. - Stage 5: This additional stage was added to account for a full literature review not being required in stage 1. In stage 5, a mapping study was conducted to enable mapping from the PROMIS-25 (a measure commonly used in routine clinical care) to the EQ-5D-Y-3L. The findings from this PhD project highlight that the EQ-5D-Y-5L is a psychometrically valid P-PROM in Australian children and performs well comparative to other generic P-PROMs such as the CHU9D, PedsQL and EQ-5D-Y-3L. The psychometric performance of the EQ-5D-Y-5L varies by health condition and consequently it’s use as a clinical PROM may be more appropriate in certain paediatric populations where its performance is stronger. Paediatric patients, caregivers, and clinicians were open to the use of the EQ-5D-Y-5L and reported that it may help achieve more holistic care. These stakeholders had a range of ideas about how the EQ-5D-Y-5L should be implemented and used to maximise impact on the patient-clinician visit. Consequently, a program, for implementing and using the EQ-5D-Y-5L in clinical paediatric outpatient care was co-designed known as the P-PROM ROCK program. The P-PROM ROCK program was designed to provide supports for both families and clinicians to complete and use the EQ-5D-Y-5L information in their clinical visit. Supports included clinician training, decision support tools, family education and an alert system for concerning responses that was patient centred. The P-PROM ROCK program also outlined the ways in which the EQ-5D-Y-5L would be scored and displayed back to patients and clinicians. The pilot RCT identified that when implemented as co-designed, the EQ-5D-Y-5L was considered feasible in clinical paediatric outpatient care, with 39 (90.7%) of the 43 participants in the intervention arm completing the EQ-5D-Y-5L prior to or as part of their clinical appointment. Furthermore, the use of EQ-5D-Y-5L in clinical care was considered acceptable, with no participants or clinicians in the intervention arm reporting the intervention as unacceptable. Finally, during the different stages of this project, it was clear that healthcare providers and health system administrators were seeking to use paediatric patient reported outcome measures like the EQ-5D-Y-5L not only to improve patient-clinician encounters, but also to inform health system policy and resourcing. In Australia, the PROMIS-25 was selected as the P-PROM for use in routine clinical care in the state of New South Wales, however, they are not able to use the PROMIS-25 at an aggregate level, as there is no corresponding value set. By mapping from the PROMIS-25 to the EQ-5D-Y-3L, this barrier was able to be overcome. This demonstrates additional value of the EQ-5D-Y to inform use of data for health system use. This PhD complements the QUOKKA study led by Prof Devlin and produces new evidence regarding the use of EQ-5D-Y-5L as a routine P-PROM in paediatric clinical care.
