Objective The objective of the study was to derive a value set based on the social preferences of the Greek population for the EQ-5D-5L questionnaire, using an internationally standardized protocol (EQ-VT protocol Version 2.1) developed by the EuroQol Group. The study protocol included one feedback module as a part of an internal validation process, along with a quality control procedure that was conducted on a weekly basis by monitoring specific indicators. Methods Data were collected through interviews with a representative sample of the general Greek population (n = 1,183), employing both the composite time trade-off (cTTO) method and a discrete choice experiment (DCE), within the framework of a weekly quality control protocol (EQ-VT protocol Version 2.1). Econometric modelling techniques were applied to generate utility values for the 3,125 health states defined by the EQ-5D-5L instrument. The value set was based on a hybrid heteroskedastic model including all available information from the composite time trade-off (cTTO) and discrete choice experiment (DCE) valuations without any exclusions due to data issues. In addition, responses were collected on key social and demographic variables, which were deemed important for subsequent analytical purposes. Results The results are based on a representative Greek sample of 1,183 valid responses. Different econometric models were explored, and the hybrid heteroskedastic model was used to generate the EQ-5D-5L values for the Greek population. This model was selected because of its statistical properties: i) the best statistical fit ii) low biased information criterion (BIC=29138) iii), low Mean Absolute Error (MAE= 0.044), iv) statistical significance of all estimated coefficients for the 20 dependent variables. (P<0.050). The observed mean cTTO values ranged from -0.8709 for the health state 55555 to 0.9356 for the health state 11112. Conclusions This study generated a set of health state values for the Greek version of the EQ-5D-5L, reflecting the health preferences of the Greek general population. It represents the first implementation of the updated valuation methodology, EQ-VT version 2.1, in Greece. The Greek values for the EQ-5D-5L can be effectively applied for HTA, cost-effectiveness, cost-utility and clinical research, as well as for QALYs, health inequalities and optimal resource allocation.
