Objective: Evidence regarding the psychometric performance of the EQ-HWB including its reliability, dimensionality, and structural validity and its associations with other quality of life (QoL) instruments is emerging. However, a comprehensive evaluation of its measurement properties is required to establish robust evidence of its reliability and validity. This study aimed to use existing data to assess the measurement properties of the EQ-HWB in comparison with both EuroQol and non-EuroQol instruments. Specifically, the study examined the validity, reliability and measurement relationships between EuroQol instruments (the EQ-HWB and EQ-5D-5L) and non-EuroQol measures of quality of life (Adult Social care Outcomes Toolkit (ASCOT) and Quality of Life- Aged Care Consumers (QOL-ACC). In addition, the study investigated the underlying dimensionality of the EQ-HWB using factor analysis.Methods: A secondary analysis of existing longitudinal data collected in 2023 was conducted to evaluate the psychometric performance of four QoL instruments in a general Australian population: the EQ-HWB, EQ-5D-5L, ASCOT, and QOL-ACC. Descriptive analyses were undertaken to examine response distributions and the presence of ceiling effects for the EQ-HWB, with comparisons made across instruments. Convergent validity were assessed by examining correlations between EQ-HWB items and conceptually related and unrelated items from the EQ-5D-5L, ASCOT, and QOL-ACC. Known-groups validity was evaluated by testing the ability of the EQ-HWB to discriminate between predefined subgroups. Test–retest reliability of the EQ-HWB was assessed. The measurement performance of the 25-item and 9-item versions of the EQ-HWB was compared using regression models. Finally, the dimensionality of the EQ-HWB was explored using exploratory factor analysis.Results: A total of 1,505 participants completed the survey, of whom 453 respondents aged ≥65 years completed all four instruments, as QOL-ACC was administered only to this age group. In this subsample, mean index scores were comparable across instruments (EQ-5D-5L: 0.88; EQ-HWB: 0.82; ASCOT: 0.88; QOL-ACC: 0.81). In the overall general population sample, a ceiling effect was observed for the EQ-5D-5L (23.3%). At the item level, the strongest correlations were observed between conceptually aligned EQ-5D-5L and EQ-HWB items, particularly pain (ρ = 0.77–0.78) and mobility (ρ = 0.66). ASCOT dignity items showed weakest correlations with EQ-HWB items (ρ = 0.03–0.20). Known-groups validity analyses were statistically significant across instruments, with the EQ-HWB demonstrating stronger discriminatory ability. Test–retest reliability for EQ-HWB was comparable to EQ-5D-5L (ICC 0.79 vs 0.73), and higher than ASCOT (ICC=0.64). Comparative regression analyses using backward stepwise linear regression showed that the EQ-HWB-25 explained a greater proportion of variance in external index scores than the EQ-HWB-9 (EQ-5D-5L: Adj R²=0.70 vs 0.65; ASCOT: 0.56 vs 0.48; QOL-ACC: 0.72 vs 0.58).Exploratory factor analyses were conducted separately for the EQ-HWB-25 and for each instrument (EQ-5D-5L, ASCOT, and QOL-ACC), with all analyses yielding a four-factor structure. EFA of pooled items across all instruments indicated that a five-factor structure provided a better model fit. The five factors identified were emotional functioning, self-care and usual activities, leisure and enjoyment, cognition and senses, and pain. EFA of pooled EQ-HWB-9 items with the other three instruments identified a four-factor structure. All items loaded on at least one factor, except for the ASCOT “food and drink” item, which did not load on any factor. The four factors were conceptually interpretable and reflected domains of pain, emotional functioning, physical functioning and independence, and social roles and engagement.For the general population sample (n = 1,505), EFA was conducted using three instruments (EQ-HWB, EQ-5D-5L, and ASCOT), as QOL-ACC was administered only to participants aged 65 years and over. The analysis identified a five-factor structure, with all ASCOT items loading on a single factor except for the ‘dignity’ item, which did not load on any factor. The first factor comprised items related to emotional functioning, while a second factor was dominated by ASCOT items and was interpreted as reflecting social care related quality of life. Items from the EQ-HWB and EQ-5D-5L relating to activities and functioning loaded on a third factor, items capturing pain and discomfort loaded on a fourth factor, and positively worded items loaded on a separate factor representing positive wellbeing.Conclusion The EQ-HWB demonstrated robust psychometric performance in an Australian population, showing moderate reliability, strong convergent validity with the EQ-5D-5L, and meaningful discrimination between known groups. The 25-item version consistently explained more variance in external QoL measures than the 9-item version. Factor analyses indicated interpretable multidimensional structures for both versions, with the EQ-HWB capturing domains of pain, emotional functioning, physical functioning and independence, and social roles and engagement. These findings support the EQ-HWB as a valid and reliable measure of broad QoL in Australian adult population.The results of this study will inform the EQ-HWB Working Group by providing evidence on the measurement properties of the EQ-HWB instruments, particularly in the Australian populations.
