INTRODUCTION: Available evidence comparing adult versus child stated preferences consistently report higher utility values for children, using the VAS, composite-TTO, DCE-with-death, DCE-with-duration, lag-time-TTO, and location-of-dead-approach, than for adult healthstates (HS). Explanations for these findings have been proposed but not verified.AIM: The aim of this research is to confirm the higher valuation for child compared to adult HS; and to investigate why respondents value child HS differently.METHODS: Eightygeneral public respondents from the UK, Belgium and The Netherlands were invited for a 1.5-hour face-to-face interview. Respondents valued four EQ-5D HS from two perspectives (8-year-old child, 40-year-old adult) using VAS and TTO. Thirty-two of the respondents participated in think-aloud interviewing. Quantitative analyses were carried out in SAS; audio-recorded interviews were transcribed,and a thematic analysis was conducted in NVIVO. Interviews were coded by two researchers using presumption-focused coding. Statements, nodes and themes were reviewed cyclically until consensus was reached within the research team. The aim was to obtain a framework with a limited number of sub-themes(nodes)and uniform statements within each node. A conceptual frameworkwasdevelopeddepicting the relationships between nodes, themes and the life years (LY) trade-off. Qualitative statements made by respondents were contrasted with their quantitative responses. RESULTS: Quantitative results: Statistically significantlyhigher utilitieswere found forchild versusadult TTO values: 0.026, 0.112, 0.377 and 0.294 higher utilities for mild, moderate, severe and worst HS (all p<0.001), whereas significantly higher VAS ratings were only observed for severe HS.Qualitative results:1,221 pages of transcripts were reviewed, resulting in 274coded statements. Fragments were categorised in 5 themes that were present both in child and adult valuation, though with a different interpretation. Two themes encompassed General principles on the value of life: Staying alive is important(Life is worth living even with impaired HRQoL, for children and adults)and Inter-generational responsibility and dependency(All lives are precious: childhood is the foundation yearsand a time for havingnew experiences; adulthood is an important time to take care of the family). Three themes were identified as ConversionFactors:Awareness of poor HRQoL and ability to make decisions(children have difficulties comprehending poor HRQoL and their parents are making choices for them, whereas adults are able to assess their HRQoL and decide for themselves); Adapting and coping(children being flexible and resilient; adults having experience with dealing with difficulties); and the Practical organisation of care(children being unconditionally cared for by their parents; adults being able to organise and pay for care).The five themes were combined into a conceptual framework, labelled the “Circle of life”.Mixed methods: Comparing statements on the value of childhood as a time for new experiences and adults’ roles in life to prepare their children for adulthood, with the same respondents’ TTO values, confirmed the concordance between the qualitative and quantitative results.CONCLUSION: Adult respondents revealed having a lower willingness-to-trade LY for achieving higher HRQoL in children. Child-specific value sets will pose a challenge for pharmacoeconomic evaluation and resource allocation as this might have implications for access to health care for children.
