Indonesia is with more than 238 million people the world’s fourth’s most populous country. Given the large gap between its under-resourced health care system and its strong and persistent economic growth (6% per year), a rise in new pharmaceutical products,and illness prevention projects with corresponding cost-effectiveness analyses are to be expected in the coming years. The introduction and use of the validated EQ-5D-5L can perform a pivotal role here. Therefore, the aimsof this study are:1. To translate the EQ-5D-5L in Bahasa Indonesia (BI), to obtain age and gender norms, and to derive a preference valuation set for the translated EQ-5D-5L health states from the Indonesiangeneral public. 2. To validate the EQ-5D-5L by its application inan impoverished population group in Jakarta. Methods: Ad 1. Translationof the 5 levels versionof the EQ-5D, the EQ-VT and the guide book will be carried out according to guidelines of the EuroQol Group Executive office. Next, arandom sample (N=1,000) representative forthe Indonesianpopulationwill be asked to value a subset of EQ-5D-5L health states usingthe EuroQol Valuation Technology (EQ-VT). Regression techniques will be used to estimate anIndonesianvalue set of all possible 3,125 EQ-5D-5L health states from the empirical validated subsample of health states. Test-retest reliability of the valuationswill be determined in a subgroup (n=200)and there we will examine the relation between the quality of the interviews (adherence to the protocol) and the valuation task (EQ-VT).Age and gender (distribution) norms of the EQ-5D-5L descriptive system and EQ-VAS for the general population will be obtained as well. Ad 2: Validation: The construct validity of the EQ-5D-5L will be determined in boththe general population and in 250 families, living in unhealthy circumstances in the urban area of Jakarta and/or Bandung. The construct validity will be based on the comparison of the EQ-5D-5L with a number of additional quality of life measures (among which the WHOQOL-Bref) and a comparison between the healthy population and the impoverished sample.In addition, the EQ-5D-5L will be completed by about 200 Indonesian patients with breast cancer in Bandungwho participate in a Dutch Cancer Foundation funded project that ischaired by two of the principleinvestigators of the presentEUROQOLproposal(SS and JP). The patients’scores will be stratified according to cancer stage (I-IV) and compared with the scores of the other samples. Reports and presentations will be provided for the Indonesian stakeholders (government officials, physicians and water sanitation companies)and for the international scientific community.
