Objectives: The EQ Health and Wellbeing Short (EQ-HWB-S) is a newly developed generic preference-accompanied measure designed for use in evaluations of health and social care interventions. Further evidence is required to assess the psychometric performance and validity of the measure. This study aims to compare the EQ-HWB-S with an existing measure, the EQ-5D-5L, and expand upon the current evidence assessing the psychometric performance of the EQ-HWB-S relative to EQ-5D-5L. Methods: Data was drawn from the valuation stages of the Extending the QALY (E-QALY) project (UK general population, n=429) and the EQ-5D-5L UK valuation pilot study (UK general population, n=248). Both studies required respondents to complete the EQ-5D-5L and the EQ-HWB-S (experimental version). The experimental version of the EQ-HWB-S was compared with the EQ-5D-5L and psychometric assessment of the measures was conducted. The distribution of responses within instruments and across overlapping dimensions of the instruments (i.e. mobility, usual activities and anxiety / depression) were assessed. Construct validity was assessed based on convergent validity of the EQ-HWB-S with EQ-5D-5L dimensions using Spearman correlations and utility scores using Pearson correlations. Known group validity was assessed by estimating effect sizes to compare the ability of the two instruments to discriminate between known groups based on age, gender, education, caregiving responsibilities, presence of a long-term condition and ‘healthy’ groups (based on the VAS). The degree of agreement in utility values was also evaluated through the use of Bland-Altman plots and estimation of Lin’s concordance correlation coefficient. Results: Variation within individuals’ response levels in overlapping items across instruments were highest in anxiety and depression and lowest in mobility. A potentially problematic skewed distribution was identified in the EQ-HWB-S mobility domain (>70% responding in the top category) which was more evident than in the EQ-5D-5L mobility domain. In all domains of both instruments, <5% responded in the bottom category. Strong associations (rs ≥0.5, P<.001) were found between conceptually overlapping dimensions of the EQ-HWB-S and EQ-5D-5L. Mean EQ-HWB-S utility scores were significantly higher (p<0.01) than EQ-5D-5L scores in the full sample and healthy subsample. The instruments performed comparably in discriminating between known groups including healthy individuals, those with long-term conditions and above average, relative to below average life satisfaction and health satisfaction. Conclusion: The EQ-HWB-S performs favourably with utility values successfully discriminating between groups where differences are expected e.g. ‘healthy’ individuals and those with long-term conditions. Convergence between the EQ-HWB-S and EQ-5D-5L is evident, especially between conceptually overlapping dimensions.
