2. Abstract Introduction Asthma is one of the major non-communicable diseases. Its recurrent nature and severity of symptoms can significantly affect patients' health-related quality of life (HRQoL). Unsurprisingly, given its generic nature, the EQ-5D-5L does not assess aspects of health known to be important for people living with asthma, such as ‘limitations of activities due to shortness of breath’ and ‘breathing difficulties’. Although physical activity restrictions might be captured by the Mobility, Self-care, and Usual activity dimensions, breathing problems (shortness of breath, coughing, and wheezing) are not explicitly included. This study aimed to assess how well the EQ-5D descriptive system addresses HRQoL for people with asthma in Ethiopia and to evaluate the additional advantage of incorporating the respiratory bolt-on (EQ-5D-5L+R). Methods Adult ( 18 years) asthmatic patients were recruited from the chest clinic of Tikur Anbessa Specialized Hospital, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Eligible participants self-completed both the EQ-5D-5L and EQ-5D-5L+R questionnaires to compare their psychometric performances in terms of distribution (ceiling effect), informativity (Shannon’s indices), convergent validity, domain dependence, and explanatory power. Semi-structured interviews were also conducted to collect qualitative data. Using a Think-aloud procedure, participants completed the EQ-5D-5L and two respiratory bolt-ons, followed by probing questions to investigate the content validity, identify potential conceptual overlaps, detect missing concepts, and evaluate the appropriateness of the recall period. Interview transcripts were analyzed thematically, supported by NVivo version 15. Results In total, 383 and 26 participants provided data for the quantitative and qualitative thematic analyses, respectively. Quantitatively, adding the respiratory bolt-on items into the EQ-5D-5L reduced the ceiling effect from 14.3% to 7.8% and increased absolute informativity (H’= 7.45 vs. H’= 6.90) and relative informativity (J’= 0.46 vs. J’= 0.87). However, including the respiratory bolt-ons had only a marginal effect on the convergent validity (Spearman’s correlation coefficient -0.66 vs. -0.67). Domain dependency analysis showed that some domains of the EQ-5D-5L were dominant over the respiratory bolt-on domains. The explanatory power of the EQ-5D-5L+R was only slightly higher than the EQ-5D-5L (R2= 0.45 vs. R2= 0.48). Qualitatively, the EQ-5D-5L with the two respiratory bolt-ons covered most of the important aspects of HRQoL in asthmatic patients. All twenty-six participants identified both limitations of activities due to shortness of breath and breathing problems dimensions relevant to describe asthma-related problems. Eighteen potential concepts not captured by the EQ-5D-5L were identified, with fatigue, sleep, and social relations being the most frequently reported aspects. Conceptual overlap was predominantly observed between the limitations of activities due to shortness of breath and mobility dimensions. More than half 14 (54%) of the participants reported that a recall period of today might not adequately reflect their health due to the fluctuating and unpredictable nature. Conclusion The EQ-5D-5L and EQ-5D-5L+R showed good comprehensiveness, comprehension, and relevance in asthmatic patients. However, important concepts, including fatigue, sleep, and social relations, might still be missing from both instruments. Additionally, the inclusion of respiratory bolt-ons into the EQ-5D-5L improved its psychometric properties by reducing the ceiling effect, increasing the informativity, and with slightly higher discriminatory and explanatory power.
