Recently, the EuroQol group launched the bolt-on toolbox which includes additional dimensions of health that can be used to complement the EQ-5D-5L in specific, well-defined cases where a dimension that seems particularly relevant for a disease or population is missing. The breathing bolt-on was originally developed by the institute for Medical Technology Assessment (iMTA) of the Erasmus University Rotterdam and validated in the general population and patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The aim of the currently proposed study is two-fold. The first part aims to validate the breathing bolt-on for the EQ-5D-5L in a new patient population, namely patients with pulmonary fibrosis. The second part of the study aims to validate the breathing bolt-on in a COPD population hospitalized for an acute exacerbation and to estimate the utility impact of COPD exacerbations with and without breathing bolt-on. The latter is relevant when estimating QALY gains from interventions that prevent or reduce severity of such exacerbations. Validation exercises will be performed using data of two ongoing clinical trials in which the EQ-5D-5L plus breathing bolt-on has been included. The first trial, the SUITS trial, evaluates implementation of home-monitoring in care management of adults with pulmonary fibrosis versus hospital-based care only. The second study, the PRECISION trial is a randomized controlled trial comparing procalcitonin (PCT)-guided antibiotics with standard care (prednisone and/or antibiotics) in adults hospitalized for a severe COPD exacerbation. Both trials are conducted in the Netherlands. For both trials recruitment of patients is ongoing and for about 75% completed. Preliminary or total baseline data will be used for the current validation exercises without specification by treatment group (i.e. blinding of group-assignment is maintained). On the data from both trials, several descriptive statistical analyses will be performed for the EQ-5D dimensions and the breathing bolt-on to explore the response distribution and correlation with patient and disease characteristics. Divergent validity will be investigated by estimating the correlation between the breathing bolt-on and each of the EQ-5D-5L dimensions. Structural validity of the EQ-5D-5L plus breathing bolt-on will be tested using principal component analyses (PCA) to investigate the extent to which the breathing bolt-on measures a different construct than the five EQ-5D-5L dimensions. Known-group validity will be assessed by comparing the outcomes of the EQ-5D-5L with and without breathing bolt-on between clinically relevant subgroups of patients. To test content validity of the breathing bolt-on in pulmonary fibrosis, clarity, comprehensiveness and relevance of the breathing bolt-on will be evaluated in cognitive interviews with among five experts, consisting of pulmonary fibrosis patients and clinicians.To estimate the impact of a severe COPD exacerbation in terms of utility decrement compared to the stable state (disutility), the EQ-5D-5L data of the PRECISION trial measured at different time points will be used to estimate the disutility per patient both with and without the breathing bolt-on.  Future research after completion of the trials will focus on responsiveness of the breathing bolt-on over time (by treatment group). Responsiveness will be part of a future proposal because the timelines for completion of recruitment, follow-up and finalization of the main analyses are currently still uncertain.
