Aim: The valuation of child and adolescent health-related quality of life raises methodological considerations, such as whose preferences, what perspective, and which elicitation technique. Prior quantitative work has shown that these choices impact on elicited preferences, but has not explored why. This qualitative project aimed to produce a better understanding of the impact of: a) perspective and elicitation technique; and b) views around, and prioritisation of, child/adult health, on the valuation of child and adolescent health states by adults.Methods: Six focus groups with 30 members of the UK adult general public were conducted and analysed using Framework analysis. The focus groups had two stages. First, participants individually valued two EQ-5D-Y (youth version of EQ-5D) health states usingTTO and DCE pairwise comparison tasks (without duration), iteratively assuming four perspectives: themselves; another adult; a 10-year old child; themselves as a 10-year old child. Second, a semi-structured discussion explored: task understanding and whatinformed responses; potential differences by perspective and task; views on the prioritisation of child/adult health; and which techniques should be used for informing policy. Results: Participants views were often heterogeneous, but key findings emerged. Typically, participants had a different willingness to trade-off life years for children versus themselves, and this differed depending upon the health profile and who was imagined by participants. The same health states were often viewed as having a different impact on utility for children than adults, but in an inconsistent way across participants. While no strong preferences for prioritising child health over working-age adult health were exhibited, there was consensus over a ‘fair innings’ argument and prioritising younger people over the elderly. Adopting other perspectives was generally more problematic than an own perspective for participants, with them finding the latter preferable.Conclusions: If an adult sample is used to value child and adolescent specific health states, we recommend that an own perspective is used, since this is likely to minimise methodological problems associated with the use of different perspectives, including emotion and bias. If a child perspective is used we recommend that sampling is representative for parental status of children aged below 18, since this can impact on preferences.
