Background Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a highly prevalent chronic skin disease that significantly impacts patients' health-related quality of life. Two bolt-ons (skin irritation and self-confidence) have improved the content validity and responsiveness of the EQ-5D-5L in psoriasis. While their content validity has been shown in AD patients, other psychometric properties remain unclear. Other items like sleep and social difficulties may also be important but have not been well-explored. The majority of available evidence and ongoing studies are from European or African populations, which may not be applicable to Asian populations. Cultural differences may impact reporting problems in the self-confidence bolt-on. Aims This study aims to assess the psychometric performance of the EQ-5D-5L with bolt-ons in Chinese AD patients. Methods A mixed-methods approach incorporating qualitative and quantitative methods will be employed in this study. The content validity (relevance, comprehensibility and comprehensiveness) of the bolt-ons—skin irritation, self-confidence, sleep, and social/relationship difficulties—will be evaluated through cognitive debriefing, with interview data analysed thematically. Results will inform the finalization of the bolt-ons for psychometric testing. The psychometric properties of the EQ-5D-5L+bolt-ons will be tested among 300 Chinese AD patients. Factor analysis will be performed to explore latent factors underlying the EQ-5D-5L+bolt-ons. Convergent validity will be assessed against the EQ-5D-5L, Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI), and Atopic Dermatitis Control Tool (ADCT), while divergent validity will be compared to core EQ-5D-5L dimensions. The Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI) will be used to compare the known-group validity of the EQ-5D-5L vs EQ-5D-5L+bolt-ons. Responsiveness will be assessed by correlating score changes from baseline to 12-week follow-up with EASI. Test-retest reliability will be assessed by evaluating the consistency of scores between baseline and the 3-day retest. Impacts This study will generate new evidence on psychometric performance of bolt-ons for skin conditions, expanding their use to Asian populations.
