Background The use of EQ-5D-Y in populations with mental health conditions is limited, resulting in insufficient knowledge/evidence concerning its performance and comparisons with other instruments. This study investigated the internal structure of EQ-5D-Y-3L and compared its psychometric properties with Child-Health-Utility-9D (CHU-9D) in children and young people (CYP) with specific phobias or autism spectrum disorders as examples. Methods Data for 268 CYP aged 7-16 years with phobia and 248 CYP aged 7-15 years with autism were obtained from two randomized controlled trials – ASPECT and I-SOCIALISE. In both trials, CYP, parents and teachers completed relevant clinical and symptoms impact measures, as well as EQ-5D-Y-3L (proxy in the I-SOCIALISE trial and self-completed in the ASPECT trial) and CHU-9D (both self-completed). The internal structure of EQ-5D-Y-3L was examined by three approaches, including reflective model, formative model, and reflective and formative combination model. The psychometric performance of EQ-5D-Y-3L and CHU-9D was determined by assessing acceptability, validity (convergent and known-groups validity), and responsiveness, as well as explanatory power. Since no UK value set for EQ-5D-Y-3L exists, the Dutch value set was used in the main analysis and the German value set applied in sensitivity analysis Results The internal structures of EQ-5D-Y-3L from both trials differed from that of the parental EQ-5D (adult version). In terms of acceptability, the missing, non-complete and floor effects were low for both EQ-5D-Y-3L and CHU-9D, but ceiling effect was larger in EQ-5D-Y-3L (>15%) for both CYP groups. Overall, in the autism trial, EQ-5D-Y-3L showed low to moderate convergent validity with most of SDQ scores (strong with the SDQ emotional symptom score), while CHU-9D showed, at best, weak association with SDQ scores. Both EQ-5D-Y-3L and CHU-9D demonstrated a small to moderate known group validity. However, for responsive validity, except EQ VAS, none of the measures demonstrated responsiveness. In the explanatory power analysis, neither measure explained the variance of SSIS social skills score-T (primary outcome of the trial). In contrast, in the phobia trial both EQ-5D-Y-3L and CHU-9 correlated well with RCADS scores, particularly with the CYP-completed version. Also both demonstrated moderate to large effect sizes in known group analysis. Depending on the chosen criteria to assess the responsiveness, both measures showed no responsiveness (as defined by BAT or ADIS/SUDS) and moderate/strong responsiveness (as defined by RCADS and CAIS). Similar to responsiveness, neither measure explained any variance of BAT (primary outcome) or ADIS/SUDS but managed to explain a proportion of variance in RCADS and CAIS, particularly in CYP-completed versions. Conclusion The findings suggest that amongst CYP with phobias, both EQ-5D-Y-3L and CHU-9D demonstrated satisfactory psychometric properties, with effect size slightly larger in CHU-9D. Considering the number of dimensions and levels involved in each measure, EQ-5D-Y-3L showed a comparable result. However, less satisfactory psychometric properties were observed for either instrument for CYP with autism in the examined dataset. Our findings also suggest that compared to proxy version, self-completed version should be encouraged when using EQ-5D-Y-3L.
