OBJECTIVE: In a previous EQ sponsored study (i.e. EQ Project 415-RA), we proposed a parsimonious modelling approach that allows for a full set of two-way interactions between the EQ-5D health domains. In the absense of a discrete choice experiment (DCE) dataset that was suitably optimized to identify a full set of two-way interactions, the proposed modelling approach was applied to an existing EQ-5D-3L dataset without duration. In this project, the previously developed modelling approach has been applied to a stand-alone EQ-5D-5L DCE with duration and EQ-5D-EQ-5D-3L composite time trade-off (cTTO) dataset. These analyses are aimed at providing important input for a) the anchoring process in the upcoming stand-alone DCE duration protocol, and b) provide evidence that the valuation of the 5 health domains are potentially not independent, which has ramifications for a bolt-on valuation strategy that the VWG needs to develop in the near future. METHODS: Instead of supplementing a main effects model with interactions between each and every level, a more parsimonious optimal scaling approach was used. This approach is based on the mapping of health-state levels onto domain-specific continuous scales. The attractiveness of health states is then determined by the importance-weighted optimal scales (i.e. main effects) and the interactions between these domain-specific scales (i.e. interaction effects). The number of interaction terms only depends on the number of health domains. As a result, interactions between dimensions can be included with only a few additional parameters. EMPIRICAL APPLICATIONS: The proposed models with and without interactions are fitted on three valuation datasets from two different countries, i.e. an Australian EQ-5D-3L time-trade-off (TTO) dataset with N=400 respondents, and a Dutch EQ-5D-5L DCE with duration dataset with N=788 respondents - and a Dutch latent-scale discrete choice experiment (DCE) dataset with N=3,699 respondents that was already analyzed in the previous project. RESULTS: Important interactions between health domains were found in all three applications. The results confirm that the accumulation of health problems within health states has a decreasing marginal effect on health state values. Moreover, conform the prior hypothesis, particularly the DCE with duration value set depends strongly on the inclusion of interaction effects. CONCLUSIONS: The proposed interaction model is parsimonious, produces estimates that are straightforward to interpret, and accommodates the estimation of interaction effects in health state valuation studies with realistic sample size requirements. Not accounting for interactions is shown to result in profoundly biased QALY tariffs, particularly in stand-alone DCE with duration studies.
