[Objectives] The serious impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in China provided a unique opportunity to test the newly published Chinese EQ-5D-Y-3L value sets and EQ-TIPS in a very large sample of young patients with COVID-19 and children affected by the lockdown. Additionally, we compared the psychometric properties of the EQ-HWB-S and the EQ-5D-5L in capturing health status and well-being in parental carers of children with COVID-19, and identified spillover effects of the disease of children with COVID-19 towards their parents and other factors associated with lower worse health status. [Methods] 861 patients with COVID-19 completed the baseline survey in the hospital. Of this sample 311 patients needed outpatient treatment or were temporally hospitalised completed a follow-up survey after 2-3 weeks in the hospital. The EQ-TIPS, Y-3L, EQ-5D-5L, EQ-HWB-S, and overall health assessment (OHA) were digitally administered. 231 healthy children and their parents were recruited as health controls using a snowball method and were administered online at home. Clinical data were collected from medical records. The analysis included assessment of known-groups validity, by comparing the proportion of dimension responses, the Level Sum Score (LSS) for EQ-TIPS and EQ-HWB-S, the index score for Y-3L and EQ-5D-5L, and EQ-VAS across children with different health status using effect sizes. Test-retest reliability and child-parent agreement were also evaluated using intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). Responsiveness of four EQ instruments to changes in respondents with improved health status was assessed using standardized effect sizes (SESs). Associations between patient’s health condition and lower parent’s HRQoL was examined by multivariate linear models. [Results] • Regarding distributional properties, children with COVID-19 experienced more problems across all dimensions compared to non-infected children, except for “communication” for EQ-TIPS; Parents' physical functions were more impacted by child’s infection than emotional functions; EQ-HWB-S demonstrated a lower ceiling effect in dimensions that overlap with EQ-5D-5L. • Regarding known-groups validity, children with COVID-19 (and their parents), those with more severe disease, or poorer OHA reported higher EQ-TIPS LSS, lower EQ-5D-Y/EQ-HWB-S/EQ-5D-5L index scores and lower EQ VAS compared to those non-infected, with milder disease severity, or with poorer OHA, supporting a good known-groups validity (ESs: 0.60-1.91); Self-completed EQ-5D-Y performed better than proxy version; EQ-5D-5L differed in relation to more child’s health conditions than EQ-HWB-S. • ICC was 0.866 for EQ-TIPS LSS, 0.726 for self-completed EQ-5D-Y index, 0.845 for proxy EQ VAS, 0.764 for EQ-HWB-S index, 0.769 for EQ-5D-5L index, 0.702 for parent’s own EQ VAS; Gwet’s AC1for EQ-HWB-S ranged from 0.33 (anxiety) to 0.79 (mobility); and from 0.41 (anxiety/depression) to 0.76 (mobility) for EQ-5D-5L, demonstrated good test-retest reliability. ICC ranged from 0.653 to 0.823, and Gwet’s AC from 0.470 to 0.738 demonstrated moderate to good child-parent agreement for EQ-5D-Y. • EQ-TIPS was responsive to health improvement (SESs: 0.98 - 1.75). Proxy Y-3L performed better responsiveness than the Self-report version (SESs: 1.16-2.29 vs 1.13- 1.98). Most of the items and scores for the EQ-HWB-S performed similar and good responsiveness as the EQ-5D-5L to improved children’s or their own health condition (SESs: 0.23-0.91 vs 0.4-0.91), and was more sensitive for the physical dimensions. • Both EQ-HWB-S and EQ-5D-5L could estimate spillover effects associated with child’s different health conditions related to COVID-19 infection, as well as their health improvement; EQ-HWB-S exhibited better discriminate ability to children with or without COVID-19, while EQ-5D-5L showed better sensitivity to child’s improvement. • Patients with a longer duration of disease and more severe disease condition, including gastrointestinal issues, exhibited a correlation with a lower EQ-HWB-S LSS score. An extended disease duration in conjunction with COVID-19-related pneumonia or conjunctivitis was linked to a reduced EQ-5D-5L index score. Additionally, when a patient had a lengthier disease duration and their parent had contracted COVID-19, it was associated with a lower EQ VAS score for the parent. [Conclusion] The results of this large study support the reliability, validity and responsiveness for the EQ-TIPS and EQ-5D-Y-3L in assessing health outcomes of young patients affected by COVID-19. The EQ-HWB-S and EQ-5D-5L performed good with comparable construct validity and responsiveness among parental carers. These findings highlight their potential as promising instruments for estimating the spillover effects associated with a child's health condition in relation to COVID-19 infection.
