The usual assumptions made when using the time trade-off method (TTO) to elicit prefernces for health states are increasingly subject to discussion. The present study focused on three issues: 1) discounting; 2) the special status of the task with comparison with immediate death (ID); 3) the increased willingness to accept a severe state if it only lasts a short time (referred to as value of life per se or maximal endurable time hypothesis, MET). I aimed to devise a method to measure the three above phenomena at the individual respondent level by asking TTO follow-up questions (TTOFUs) after the regular composite TTO task (cTTO) has ended. In total, 7 TTOFUs were designed, Q1--Q7. Q1--Q3 were aimed at identifying the discounting functional form (exponential, hyperbolic, or power) and direction (positive, negative, or none). Q4 and Q5 were aimed at measuring the fear of ID, i.e., the additional unwillingness to accept a state as worse than dead (WTD). Q6 and Q7 were aimed at detecting the increased acceptance of living in a severe state when duration is shortened (or vice versa: decreased acceptance when duration is longered, as usually interpreted in MET). Q1--Q3 were asked if a state was valued in cTTO as better than dead with utility >0.1. Q4 was asked for states equivalent to being dead or with utility = 0.05 or 0.1. Q5--Q7 were asked for states WTD. Data from 148 respondents were collected via online interviews. Eeach respondent valued 6 EQ-5D-5L health states. Regarding discounting, no standard functional form seems to fit the observed pattern of responses. Depending on the TTOFU, either positive or negative time preference seems to prevail. These findings can be explained when QALY model is disregarded and it is assumed that quality-of-life and longevity are aggregated in an additive, not multiplicative, way, and that the durations are compared in a relative, not absolute, way. Regarding the fear of ID, it seems that is is equivalent to about 1.5 years in full health in the standard QALY model. This can explain at least partially the observed gap in the slightly negative values elicited with cTTO. Regarding MET, it was confirmed that shortening the duration increases the acceptance of a state, both when compared to ID and when comparing two different durations in the same state.
