Background: As a measure of health-related quality of life (HRQoL), the EuroQoL five-dimensional five-level (EQ-5D-5L) has found wide applicability in various cultures and health conditions. However, there is limited evidence on the psychometric properties of the tool among cervical cancer patients in Ethiopia. Objective: To evaluate the validity, reliability, responsiveness, minimal clinically important difference (MCID), and the relationship between MCID and minimal detectable change (MDC) among patients with cervical cancer patients in Ethiopia. Methods: A longitudinal study was conducted from March 2022 to July 2023 among cervical cancer patients at two tertiary care hospitals in Ethiopia. Participants completed the EQ-5D-5L and the European Organization for Research and Therapy of Cancer (EORTC QLQ-C30) at baseline and after three months of treatment. Test re-test reliability of EQ-5D-5L dimensions was evaluated by Gwet’s AC2 while the index and EQ-VAS scores were calculated by intra-class correlation coefficients (ICC). Convergent validity with the EORTC QLQ-C30 was estimated using the Spearman correlation coefficient. Kruskal Wallis test was used to assess the tool’s ability to discriminate varied levels of patient health status among patient subgroups. Furthermore, effect size and standardized response mean were employed to assess the responsiveness over time. The anchor-based, distribution-based, and instrument-based methods were used to calculate the MCID estimates. The MCID estimates to MDC ratios were computed at the individual and group levels at a 95% CI. All statistical analysis was performed using R software. Statistical significance was determined at p < 0.05. Results: Three hundred seventy-one patients with cervical cancer had completed the survey at baseline and follow-up with a median age of 50 (41, 56) years. The majority (73%) of the patients were diagnosed at an early stage and HIV/AIDS was the most prevalent comorbidity. According to the Wilcoxon rank test, the index value and EQ-VAS scores of EQ-5D-5L improved by 0.04 and 7.0 post-treatment compared with baseline respectively. The Gwet’s AC2 ranged from 0.73 to 0.97 for EQ-5D-5L dimensions while the ICC for index value and EQ-VAS were 0.71 and 0.79, respectively indicating good test-retest reliability. The effect size ranged between -0.12 to 0.60 for the index value, indicating small to moderate responsiveness, and -0.12 to 1.16 for the EQ-VAS scores, indicating moderate to large responsiveness. Moreover, the average (range) MCID value of the EQ-5D index score was 0.10-0.15. The findings showed that only the MCID to MDC ratios at the group level were clinically meaningful than individual level. Conclusion: The EQ-5D-5L instrument was able to detect changes in health and discriminate between patients with different levels of health. While group-level MCIDs were established in this study, further studies need to be done to prove its usefulness at the individual level.
