Background Significant variations in the UK’s population health have been widely observed. Little is known about individual and health service factors associated with these variations in health or about how much of the unexplained variation is at patient and health service levels. Aim This report explores which factors explain the variation in patients’ self-reported health, measured by the EQ-5D-5L instrument, for the English general population and for ten patient groups with self-reported chronic conditions. We quantify how much of the variation that observed factors could not explain can be attributed to patients, general practice, and Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCGs) characteristics and whether they differ across the general population and ten patient groups. Methods We linked data from three data sources - the NHS’s General Practitioner (GP) Patient Survey, Quality and Outcomes Framework, and GP workforce databases, over five years between 2012/13 to 2016/17. The resulting dataset covers almost all GP practices in England, with a nationally representative sample for the general population (N=2,913,294). Additionally, we generated ten subsamples for each chronic condition. We use ordinary least squares, mixed-effects, practice fixed- and random-effects models to identify factors associated with EQ-5D-5L index variation for the general practice population and for groups of patients with one of ten specific conditions. We also calculate ICCs using variances estimated from mixed-effects models to decompose the unexplained variation in the EQ-5D-5L index to patient, GP, and CCG levels. We explored the impact of missing values on mixed-effects models using multiple imputation. Results Some explanatories (such as multimorbidity, gender, deprivation, employment status, smoking status, satisfaction with access to the practice and good overall experience with the practice) had similar and plausibly signed effects for all 11 sets of individuals. But there were differences for those with different conditions. For example, those reporting their ethnicity as Black had lower EQ-5D-5L index if they had Alzheimer/dementia or angina but higher EQ-5D-5L index if they have asthma, diabetes, hypertension, or mental health problems. Better clinical quality for specific conditions was associated with better patient reported health only for three conditions (asthma, diabetes, epilepsy). For the general practice population, the unexplained variation in the EQ-5D-5L index was almost entirely at patient level (99.57%) with very small general practice (0.29%) and CCG (0.14%) contributions. Ten condition-specific patient groups shared similar findings for the decomposition of unexplained variation as that from the general population. Conclusion The findings from our study identifies factors that explain the variation in health for the general population and patient groups with chronic conditions in England. Policymakers could develop interventions to reduce or eliminate the effects for some of those factors in our list, such as smoking and deprivation status of individuals, or patient satisfaction with access to their general practice, to improve health and to reduce variation in health.
