Preference-based health-related quality of life (HRQoL) measures, such as EQ-5D, can be used to obtain quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) weights but performed poorly in people with mental health conditions. Mental well-being measures, such as GHQ-12, can provide complementary information but cannot be directly used to optimise the amount and distribution of QALYs under the influence of policy decisions. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on mental well-being raised the interest in integrating measures such as the GHQ-12 in QALY optimisation applications. An increasing number of studies tried to map relations between EQ-5D and non-preference-based measures, but few have looked into the concepts being measured to check the legitimacy of mapping. Concepts such as HRQoL and mental well-being are vaguely defined in health outcomes research and there is no agreement on their definitions and measurement. In this work, we aimed to understand to what extent the items of EQ-5D and GHQ-12 associate with each other. The second aim was to distinguish the constructs of concepts including health, quality of life and mental well-being, which are vaguely defined and often used interchangeably. We used complete data of 12701 respondents, with a mean age of 55.6 years (SD 14.2) and of which 66.1% were women, participating in Wave 46 of the Great Corona Study in Belgium, in 2022. Individual-level socio-demographic covariates, EQ-5D-5L, GHQ-12 and overall life satisfaction were used for analysis. Pearson correlation coefficients between the total scores and Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients between each item of the measures were calculated. Multidimensional scaling (MDS) and exploratory factor analysis (EFA) were performed to investigate the underlying constructs that are associated with the items of EQ-5D and GHQ-12. Regression models were developed to further assess associations between EQ-5D and GHQ-12 responses, while the five dimensions of EQ-5D, EQ-5D utility scores, and EQ-VAS were treated as dependent variables and GHQ-12 items were independent variables. Despite a moderate correlation (0.39) between the EQ-5D utility scores and GHQ-12 total scores, only a trivial or small correlation (<0.3) was observed between the first four EQ-5D items and all GHQ-12 items, while EQ-Anxiety/Depression had a small to moderate correlation with GHQ-12 items (between 0.27 and 0.5). MDS suggested the first four EQ-5D dimensions were clustered together with EQ-VAS, positively-phrased GHQ-12 items were close to each other, while EQ-Anxiety/Depression and negatively-phrased GHQ-12 items were grouped with satisfaction. The results of EFA can be interpreted similarly. In the regression models, although the aggregate GHQ-12 score correlated significantly with EQ-5D utility scores and VAS, not all GHQ-12 items had a meaningful coefficient (ie. significant, non-zero, and/or without a reversed sign) to predict EQ-5D responses, after controlling for relevant socio-demographic variables. This study explored the constructs of HRQoL and mental well-being. The results showed that GHQ-12 can only partially predict the responses of EQ-5D, thus, mathematical algorithms trying to directly estimate EQ-5D-5L scores from GHQ-12 scores will result in the loss of information and may therefore be conceptually problematic. Further research is required to elaborate on whether it would be conceptually appropriate to use alternative ways to derive EQ-5D changes from (partial information) in GHQ-12 changes.
