Background:Studies to produce value sets for preference-based measures of health require a full health upper anchor to be defined if the values are to be used to calculate quality-adjusted life years.A recentempirical study assesseddifferences in time trade-offvaluations using two comparator health states: 11111 and full health. The primary results of thatstudy suggest that EQ-5D-5L health state values are not greatly affected by whether 11111 or full health is used as the comparator state.The study also generated data on how survey respondents interpreted those descriptions, and on what aspects of health they consider to be missing from the EQ-5D descriptive system.Aims:To report the methods and findings of an analysis of the qualitative data collected relating to the following questions: Whatmakes 11111 and full health different? What important aspects of health are not captured by the five EQ-5D dimensions?Methods:Data were collected froma broadly representative sample of the UK general publicvia face-to-face interviews. After completinga valuation questionnaire using EQ-VT, respondents completeda short pen-and-paper follow-up questionnaire. Thefollow-up tasks were developed by the study team to elicit additional information about the comparability between 11111 and full health and respondents’ interpretations of those concepts; and to inform the ongoing research agenda around the measurement of health beyond the existing EQ-5D descriptive system.A combination of descriptive and thematic techniques were used to analyse the data. Results:Interviews were conducted in 2014. Data are available for 436 respondents. A sizeable minority (30%) of respondents did not agree when asked whether they considered 11111 and full health to be the same as each other. When asked what makes them different, many respondents suggested that the five EQ-5D dimensions are not exhaustive of all conditions and health problems. Sensory deprivation (particularly vision and hearing) and mental health were the aspects of health most commonly suggested by respondentsas being important but not captured by EQ-5D.Discussion and Conclusions:To some extent, the findings of this study support the choice of areas in which developmental bolt-on work has been conducted to date. Further research is required to establish whether and what people would be willing to trade for improvements in the aspects of healthnot currently included in the EQ-5D.We hope that this study can provide a basis for more detailed qualitative and quantitative research to inform further review of theEQ-5D descriptive system.
