Introduction: Skin conditions do not constitute a direct threat to life, but their chronic and incurable character has a negative impact on the health-related quality of life (HRQoL). In the EQ-5D, physical discomfort, such as that associated with skin conditions (e.g., itching), is captured by the pain/discomfort item. While pain is clearly a very important aspect of physical discomfort, other aspects such as itching, skin irritation, and the indirect impact of this on skin appearance, self-confidence, and relationship difficulties are not explicitly mentioned. An EQ-5D-5L psoriasis bolt-on (EQ-PSO), which includes itching and self-confidence, has been shown to have face validity in studies undertaken in the global North, but no study has been undertaken in the global South. The objective of this study is to investigate how well aspects of HRQoL are captured by the EQ-5D descriptive system, and more specifically by the pain-discomfort item, and the additional advantage of using the psoriasis bolt-ons (EQ-PSO questionnaire) in people with skin diseases in Ethiopia.Method: Translation of both EQ-5D-5L and EQ-PSO was undertaken into Tigrinya language by two forward translators, two backward translators, one proofreader, four interviewers, and a project manager, in collaboration with the EuroQol version management committee (VMC). In-depth qualitative interviews were then undertaken to investigate how well the health aspects important for people with skin diseases (psoriasis) are captured by the EQ-5D descriptive system, the pain-discomfort item, and the additional advantage of using the EQ-PSO questionnaire. Both EQ-5D-5L and EQ-PSO questionnaires were administered to participants. The qualitative interviews were recorded using an encrypted audio recording device, transcribed, and translated. For the analysis, statements were grouped into thematically related groups based on aspects of content validation, including comprehension (understanding), relevance, and comprehensiveness.ResultsTwenty-nine adults with psoriasis participated in the interviews. Most reported moderate to severe disease burden with itching (51.7%), psychological distress (27.6%), and impaired daily functioning (34.5%) as major concerns. While the EQ-5D-5L was generally understood and relevant, several psoriasis-specific aspects, such as itching, self-confidence, and social stigma, were perceived as missing. The EQ-PSO bolt-on dimensions (itching and self-confidence) were consistently rated as highly relevant and reflective of participants lived experiences. Minor conceptual overlap was noted between the pain/discomfort and skin irritation dimensions, but each contributed distinct information.ConclusionThe EQ-PSO bolt-on for itching and self-confidence improves content validity and better reflects the lived experience of patients. Incorporating bolt-ons offers a more comprehensive assessment of HRQoL in this population and may support improved measurement in clinical and economic evaluations.
