Background: Measuring quality of life (QoL) in older adults residing in care facilities presents unique challenges, including cognitive impairment, the applicability of generic QoL instruments, and the burden of data collection. The EQ-HWB (EQ Health and Wellbeing Instrument) is a comprehensive international measure designed to assess health, carer, and social-care-related QoL, with both a full 25-item version and a condensed 9-item version (EQ-HWB-S). However, little research has been conducted on the performance and feasibility of the EQ-HWB instruments in residential aged care settings, particularly in the UK. Research aims: This study aims to evaluate the added value of the EQ-HWB (25-item) compared to EQ-HWB-S (9-item) in measuring QoL among older adults in UK residential care facilities. Specifically, it will assess (i) whether the additional 16 items improve measurement performance; (ii) the feasibility and burden of administering the full version; and (iii) the psychometric performance of modified EQ-HWB items appearing in the 25 version only. Additionally, this research will compare EQ-HWB (25 and 9 item versions) with the Adult Social Care Outcomes Toolkit self complete version (either ASCOT-SCT4 or the recently developed ASCOT-ER(OP), easy read older person version) to examine alignment with a policy-relevant social care and wellbeing measure. Methods: The study will recruit 120-150 residents from approximately 15 UK residential care facilities, utilizing trained social care researchers for data collection. The study design includes psychometric analyses to identify potentially redundant items, examine construct validity through known-group comparisons, and assess feasibility based on completion time, missing data, and respondent burden. Further analysis will compare the EQ-HWB and self complete ASCOT-SCT/ASCOT-ER(OP) instruments (at item and utility score level); interpreting differences in scores and psychometric properties in the context of the instruments theoretical frameworks. Findings from this study will provide critical insights into the applicability of EQ-HWB in care home settings, contributing to the refinement of the instrument and informing potential policy on QoL measurement for older adults in residential care. This research directly supports EuroQol’s strategic objective to advance the EQ-HWB to ‘Approved’ status by providing empirical evidence on its validity, feasibility, and distinct value compared to its short-form and another key social care measure.
