Introduction: It is becoming increasingly important for decision makers to be able to measure and compare diverse outcomes arising from health and socialcare interventions. Use of different outcome measures for assessment in the two sectors creates difficulties for comparisons and for capturing the multiple outcomes in a single metric. EQ-5D is the preferred measure of health-related quality of life (HRQoL) by key decision-makers in the UK. However, there is currently little clarity about how it is associated with other outcomes used in social care. Method: We empirically compared responses to EQ-5D with responses to measures of social care needs and subjective wellbeing using a large cross-sectional dataset of the UK general population, the Health Survey for England.Bivariate and multivariate regression analyses wereused to examine whethersocial care needs,measured by the Barthel Index,in people aged 65 years and over could beexplained by EQ-5Dresponsesand wellbeing measures; and how much ofthe variation in mental health and subjective well-being in the general population, as captured by GHQ-12 and WEMWBS, are explained by the EQ-5D. Results: Our study found that responses indicating poor health and wellbeing in EQ-VAS, EQ-5D Index, GHQ-12 summary score and WEMWBS pointspredicted a need for social care. Investigation of dimensions used to construct the measuresfound that two of the EQ-5D dimensions -self-care and pain/discomfort -were significantly associated withneed for social care. In addition, individuals with extreme anxiety/depression(compared to notanxious/depressed) and unable to perform usual activities (compared to no problem in performing usual activity) were more likely to report need for social care. None of the GHQ-12 dimensions were significantly associated with the Barthel Index. Two dimensions from WEMWBS,‘been feeling useful’ and ‘had energy to spare’ were significantly associated with the Barthel index. Amongst background characteristics, age and limiting longstanding illness were significant predictors of social care need across all the models. Conclusion: The need for social care,which largely depends on one’s ability to perform personal day-to-day activities,appears to be significantly associated with those EQ-5D dimensions that capture physical health and mental health.This offers the EuroQol group a strong ground to pursue how best EQ-5D instrument could be made available in capturing outcomes of social care, increasing comparability in economic evaluations between the health and social care sectors. This may includereviewingdescriptive system and/or any future development of additional or amended EQ-related questionnaire.
