Background: DCE with duration (DCEtto) is an alternative protocol for deriving population value sets for instruments such as the EQ-5D-5L. Valuation studies of the EQ-5D-5L so far have used the EQ-VT which only included DCE without duration questions. In Canada, we sought to estimate the DCEtto by combining the EQ-VT with additional DCEtto questions. Our objectives were twofold: 1) to determine the feasibility of generating the DCEtto from this combination of EQ-VT and DCEtto questions; and 2) to further investigate the validity of the DCEtto. The latter involved comparing individual values from the conventional TTO and the DCEtto.Methods: Data from 1107respondents in the Canadian EQ-5D-5L valuation survey are used. Each respondent completed the EQ-VT (composite TTO, and DCE without duration) followed by an additional survey which included 2 DCEtto tasks. These DCEtto tasks where selected using experimental design theory whereby the DCE without duration tasks were assumed to have equal duration, and combined with the DCEtto data to create a single dataset amenable for the analysis. For our first objective we useda conditional logit modelto estimate coefficients from the combined data. For our second objective ran mixed logit models and used hierarchical bayes to estimate individual values from the DCEtto. We then compared these to the TTO values.Results: The DCEtto provided coefficients that were statistically significant and logically ordered. Values ranged from 1 to -0.71(for health state 55555). Thiscontrasted to a range of 1 to 0for the TTO, suggesting clear differences in cardinal values derived from the two different protocols. The DCEtto values were better distributed than the TTO, which for severe health states suffered from clusters of values at 1, 0.5, 0 and -1. However, there was limited consistency between severe health states between the DCEtto and TTO. Conclusions: Values for the EQ-5D-5L were successfully generated using the DCEtto by simply adding two questions to the EQ-VT. The model generated plausible values, and the model coefficients were similar to those seen in previous DCEtto studies.The DCEtto values for severe health states were lower than those generated from the conventional TTO.
