Background/Context: The EuroQol 5D-5L instrument is widely used to assess the impact on health-related quality of life (HRQoL) among COVID-19 survivors and individuals with Post-COVID Condition (PCC). Efforts to refine the EQ-5D-5L include the addition of bolt-ons (i.e. dimensions that can be appended to the EQ-5D-5L to benefit its use in a particular population) to better capture specific health dimensions. However, the presence and influence of recall bias in retrospective measurements using the EQ-5D-5L and its bolt-ons, particularly in post-acute infection syndromes (PAIS) like PCC, is not well understood. Recall bias is commonly observed in individuals with long-term illness or a history of pain. Additionally, the adoption of coping mechanisms is prevalent in these populations and may directly influence the accuracy of how they recall health experiences. Given that symptoms in PCC often persist for years after the initial infection, we hypothesize that the potential for recall bias in PCC patients is substantial. Addressing this methodological challenge is therefore critical for improving HRQoL assessments. Moreover, understanding the role of coping mechanisms and how they contribute to recall bias is essential for improving the accuracy of retrospective health measurements for this population. Addressing these challenges is key to ensuring reliable interpretations of HRQoL changes in treatment, care, and longitudinal studies using the EQ-5D-5L. Objective/Aim: This PhD proposal has two main aims. First, to explore the presence of recall bias based on perceived change assessed at three year follow-up using the EQ-5D-5L and bolt-on symptom questions in patients with a previous SARS-CoV-2 infection with and without PCC. Second, to explore the different types of coping mechanisms used by individuals with PCC and assess whether these mechanisms influence the health domains of the EQ-5D-5L and bolt-ons, and how they contribute to recall bias when retrospectively reporting on HRQoL. Methodology: Secondary analyses will be performed on the combined data from the CORFU and Long CORFU studies (EQ Project 1569-RA). This is a longitudinal dataset containing data of several former COVID-19 patient groups (at home, admitted to the hospital, either general ward or the intensive care unit) up to 3 three years after SARS-CoV-2 infection. Data were collected using questionnaires, including the EQ-5D-5L for HRQoL assessment and 13 symptom questions that were rated using the same 5 level Likert scale as the EQ-5D-5L. The three year follow-up questionnaire included retrospective questions on changes (compared to 12 months before), on the EQ-5D-5L dimensions and symptoms. The EQ-5D-5L dimensions and symptoms measurements collected prospectively at two and three years and retrospective measurements will be used to assess the presence and magnitude of recall bias. Differences will be tested across dimensions and bolt-ons. Moreover, we collected data on the use of coping mechanisms associated with perceived improved health at three years follow-up, making an analysis of associations with recall bias possible. Frequencies of coping mechanisms will be described and associations with recall bias tested using multivariable regression models. Analysis will be done for PCC and non PCC individuals, and other subgroups of interest.
