Objectives: Medical advancement has enabled children to survive congenital airway anomalies, rare diseases and critical illnesses with medical technology including tracheostomies and long-term ventilation to support breathing. The number of technology-dependent children is increasing globally with the increased use of healthcare services. This study aimed to assess 1) the psychometric performance, of the EQ-5D-Y-3L (Y-3L), EQ-5D-Y-5L (Y-5L) (proxy and self-report) and EQ-TIPS in children dependent on technology in South Africa and 2) the impact of caring for these children was assessed with the EQ-5D-5L and CarerQoL. Methods: Caregivers and children, where possible, completed the EQ-TIPS or Y-3L and Y-5L, PedsQL and Paediatric Tracheostomy Health Status Instrument (PTHSI) to reflect the child’s health. In addition caregivers self-completed socio-demographic information, EQ-5D-5L and CarerQoL to reflect their own health and burden of caring for the child. Concurrent validity of the EQ-TIPS, Y-3L and Y-5L was examined with the association to PedsQL and PTHSI scores with Pearson’s correlations. The median HRQoL scores were compared across known socio-demographic and clinical variables with Kruskal-Wallis H-test. The redistribution of Proxy and self-report Y-3L and Y-5L responses were examined for inconsistency of responses and discriminatory power as reported on the Shannon’s H’ and J’ index. Inter-rater reliability of the Y-3L, Y-5L and PedsQL scores were compared by weighted kappa, Intra-class correlation coefficients and Pearson’s correlation. The association between caregiver scores, on the EQ-5D-5L, CarerQoL and PTHSI caregiver score, and caregiver and child scores were computed with Spearman’s correlation. The median Caregiver scores were compared across known socio-demographic variables and clinical variables related to their child with the Kruskal-Wallis H-test. Results: Responses from 144 caregivers were collected, 66 for children aged 1 month to 4 years completing EQ-TIPS and 78 for children aged 5-18 years completing Y-3L and Y-5L. The EQ-TIPS showed a higher report of no problems for social interaction for children aged 1-12 months (p=0.040), there were however no age related differences in the LSS or EQ VAS scores. EQ-TIPS showed strong association to the PedsQL scores except for a moderate association with the emotional functioning score. EQ-TIPS median LSS was able to differentiate between groups on clinical prognosis with a better HRQoL in those where weaning from technology is possible compared to those where it is not possible (H=18.98, p=0.011). The inter-rater reliability was similarly moderate for both the Y-3L and Y-5L dimensions with the greatest agreement between dimensions of mobility and looking after myself on the Y-3L. The inter-rater reliability of the PedsQL was generally low with the best agreement on the psychosocial summary score (ICC=0.56). Inconsistencies when moving between the Y-3L and Y-5L were higher for child self-report compared to proxy report with 33% of self-report inconsistencies attribute to a lot of problems on the Y-3L and a little bit of problems on the Y-5L. The proxy versions showed greater discriminatory power (ΔH’=-20.0) and spread of responses on the Y-5L (ΔJ’=-13.7) when compared to the self-report versions (ΔH’=-17.6; ΔJ’=11.0). Despite a good average change in discriminatory power for the self-complete version this was specifically related to dimensions of mobility and looking after myself with a corresponding poor spread of responses for mobility and worried, sad or unhappy. The concurrent validity of the Y-3L and Y-5L was moderate to strong for both the Y-3L and Y-5L proxy and self-complete versions. The median Y-3L and Y-5L LSS proxy scores were able to discriminate between groups with different clinical severity whereas only the Y-3L LSS self-complete was able to discriminate. Caregiver and child HRQoL scores showed moderate to strong associations. Conclusion: Further investigation into the EQ-TIPS dimension of social interaction is warranted for both the understanding of the current wording and the appropriateness for young children aged 1-12 months. The EQ-TIPS, Y-3L and Y-5L were all able to differentiate between children with known clinical variables and outperformed both the PedsQL and PTHSI. The Proxy versions of the Y-3L and Y-5L showed better psychometric performance than the self-report versions. This was most notable with the high inconsistency of responses between the Y-3L and Y-5L and the poor distribution of responses on the Y-5L self-report versions. This may indicate that children in this cohort may be able to better express their health on the Y-3L version. The caregiver scores are associated with the child HRQoL scores and thus this spill over should be accounted for in any interventions targeting this cohort. It is recommended that future studies investigate the reliability and responsiveness of these measures in children dependent on technology for breathing.
