Background: Cancer contributes to a significant disease burden worldwide, with gastrointestinal (colorectal and oesophageal) and prostate cancer among the top five cancers. There are existing surveillance programs for individuals at above-average risk of developing colorectal cancer with colonoscopy, and endoscopy surveillance for oesophageal cancer. Treatment for prostate cancer includes hormonal therapy or surgery and active surveillance in early-stage disease. Under surveillance and following treatment, individuals have regular encounters with the health care system to monitor the presence of pre-cancerous lesions, cancer progression or cancer recurrence. These encounters affect patients' quality of life (QoL), specifically anxiety over the fear of cancer. While QoL is a required input for economic evaluations informing the efficient allocation of health care resources, existing recommended generic QoL measures often lack sensitivity in cancer surveillance populations. The EQ Health and Wellbeing short (EQ-HWB-S) is a new generic utility-based measure of health and wellbeing covering nine dimensions, including control, anxiety and being sad/depressed. Given its broader coverage of wellbeing aspects, the EQ-HWB-S may offer a more sensitive and suitable alternative for capturing QoL impacts in cancer surveillance settings. Aim: To assess the psychometric performance of the EQ-HWB-S as an outcome measure in individuals under regular surveillance for gastrointestinal cancers and following a diagnosis of prostate cancer. Methods: Participants in surveillance will be invited from two existing pre-cancer registries for oesophageal (≈250) and colorectal (≈1000) and one post-diagnosis registry for prostate cancer (≈1600). The EQ-HWB-S will be completed alongside the EQ-5D-5L, as well as the cancer-specific EORTC QLQ-C30 and the prostate cancer-specific EPIC-26. Convergent/divergent validity, known-group validity and feasibility will be assessed. Sensitivity will be assessed by exploring ceiling/floor effects and responsiveness. Expected outcomes and significance: The EQ-HBW-S is expected to demonstrate strong psychometric validity in this population, given its broader coverage of wellbeing dimensions such as anxiety, control, and sadness, which are highly relevant to individuals undergoing cancer surveillance. We anticipate that our results will support the wider adoption of the EQ-HWB-S in routine care, which will provide more sensitive and accurate inputs for health economic evaluations of interventions in cancer surveillance settings.
