Using 1000minds software, an online tool was created to value the EQ-5D-Y-5L and, separately, the EQ-5D-5L. The tool implemented the Potentially All Pairwise RanKings of all Possible Alternatives (PAPRIKA) method – an adaptive discrete choice experiment (DCE) – and a binary search algorithm to identify the location of ‘dead’ within each participant’s full ranking of health states. Convenience sampling was used to recruit 24 New Zealand adolescents aged 16-19 years (13 female; 50% Māori). Each adolescent completed two online DCE questionnaires (about 2 weeks apart, in random order), one comprising the EQ-5D-Y-5L and the other, the EQ-5D-5L. Both questionnaires included questions relating to health states worse than dead. The online questionnaires were completed in two face-to-face think-aloud sessions in the presence of a researcher (TS or SD) and a young research assistant. Each session concluded with a semi-structured interview to obtain feedback about the questionnaires and to explore adolescents’ views on including their preferences in decision making. There was no evidence of a difference (p>0.57) in mean differences in preference weights (by dimension) across the youth (Y-5L) and adult (5L) instruments; observed mean differences were small (diff≤0.01). The overall ranking of dimensions was similar between the two instruments with Worried, sad or unhappy (Y-5L) and Anxiety/Depression (5L) ranked 1st, Pain/Discomfort and Usual Activities 2nd or 3rd, Mobility 4th, and Looking after myself (Y-5L) and Self-Care (5L) 5th. The mean values for dead (i.e. before rescaling for dead = 0) was 0.410 for the EQ-5D-Y-5L and 0.417 for the EQ-5D-5L. The lowest health state values and the percentage of health states less than zero were ̶ 0.796 and 17.8%, and ̶ 0.884 and 21.2% respectively. Adolescents were capable of trading-off health states, including health states worse than dead. They think their preferences should contribute to social value sets and that completing the questionnaires in-person enhanced the quality of their responses.
