Background & study aim Preference-weighted measures (PWMs) of health status/health-related quality of life play an essential role in estimating Quality-adjusted life-years (QALY) for use in economic evaluations of health care products and interventions. However, as PWMs are first and foremost intended to accurately reflect respondent health status, ideally, they should demonstrate good psychometric properties for the population in question. This study aimed to systematically review published evidence on the measurement properties of commonly used PWMs for children and adolescents. Methods Three electronic databases (PubMed, Medline, and PsycINFO) were searched for articles assessing the psychometric properties (content validity, construct validity (including convergent validity and known-group validity), test-retest reliability, and responsiveness) of the PWMs of interest (AQoL-6d, CHU9D, HUI2, HUI3, and EQ-5DY). The COsensus-based Standards for the selection of health Measurement INstruments methodology (COSMIN) guidelines were used to assess a) the methodological quality of the studies included and b) the psychometric performance of the instruments covered. Data were analysed overall as well as by population (country and disease group) and perspective (self-report or proxy-report). This study protocol was registered in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) database (CRD42021277296). Results In total, 42 articles were included in this systematic review. HUI was tested only in patient populations, CHU9D was tested mostly in general population samples, while EQ-5D-Y was tested in both populations. Overall, there was high-quality evidence supporting sufficient construct validity for all instruments except AQoL-6D. Evidence for supporting test-retest and responsiveness was of low quality. Evidence for content validity was minimal and therefore not extracted and synthesized for all PWMs. Conclusion This review provides updated evidence on the measurement properties of existing generic PWMs for children and adolescents. This review only included articles published in the English language and results are limited and might be biased. More studies are needed to further assess those instruments in a wider range of population types, countries, and disease groups.
