Long COVID is a condition characterised by long-term sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19. The symptoms of long COVID are wide ranging and fluctuating, and can include breathlessness, chronic fatigue, brain fog, anxiety and stress, generalised pain, persisting high temperature and mental health problems. The exact nature of symptoms and number of people who experience long-term symptoms is unknown but updated global evidence suggests that approximately 4-10% of people who test positive for SARS-CoV-2 are likely to experience one or more symptoms for longer than 12 weeks. As a new and emerging chronic condition with a large and growing burden amongst the population it is important to understand what impact long COVID has on health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and whether the impact varies across subgroups of the population.  This project analysed two types of secondary data to understand the validity, sensitivity and responsiveness of the EQ-5D as a measure of HRQoL in patients with long COVID. The first source of secondary data was in the form of a systematic literature review. We reviewed the published literature on long COVID that included EQ-5D as a measure of HRQoL, to understand their justification for using the EQ-5D and whether they provided evidence on the validity of the instrument. The second source of secondary data was a number of long COVID cohort studies that employed the EQ-5D, we undertook a meta-analysis of these individual studies to understand the burden of long COVID. We found that while the EQ-5D is commonly used in long COVID research, there is limited evidence of its psychometric properties in this condition, despite numerous studies justifying the use of the EQ-5D as a validated instrument. Our evidence synthesis of cohort studies confirms why validation may be a challenge, there is considerable heterogeneity across long COVID populations. An estimate of the HRQoL shortfall (from a population norm estimate from the Health Survey for England) suggests that the decrement is larger for females than males and greatest for the younger age groups, that is the burden of long COVID is felt most by females aged <40 years old.
