Objectives Australia has a well-established HTA process and there is widespread use of generic instruments in evidence presented to it. However, there are gaps in tools and evidence available to support evaluation of paediatric health. The aim of this paper is to produce an Australian EQ-5D-Y-3L value set. Methods The methods follow the international EQ-5D-Y-3L (Y-3L) valuation protocol, but with an expanded design. Composite Time Trade Off (cTTO) and Discrete Choice Experiment (DCE) data were collected from two independent samples. In total, 52 Y-3L health states, assigned into four blocks of 14 health states each containing health state 33333, were valued using cTTO. CTTO data were collected via videoconferencing interview and each respondent valued 14 health states. Mean observed cTTO values were adjusted for censoring at -1 using a Tobit model. For the DCE component, 150 latent scale DCE choice pairs were collected via an online survey with each participants completing 15 pairs. DCE data were modelled using a garbage class mixed logit model. Two approaches to anchor DCE data to the QALY scale were explored: anchoring using the mean observed cTTO value for the worst health state (33333); mapping DCE data onto the mean observed cTTO values using all 52 health states. Two evaluation criteria were used to select the final value set: (1) coefficient significance and logical consistency; (2) prediction accuracy of the mean observed cTTO values. Results In total, 268 individuals participated in the cTTO interviewers, and 1002 completed the DCE survey. The linear mapping without intercept performed the best and was selected as the final value set. Health state values ranged between 0.142 to 1. The relative importance of domains by level 3 coefficients was as follows (ordered from most to least important): pain/discomfort, feeling worried, sad or unhappy, usual activities, looking after myself and mobility. Conclusion This study reports an Australian value set for the EQ-5D-Y-3L, which enables the calculation of Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) for use in the economic evaluation of paediatric interventions and can support evidence development and decision making.
